# 2. Microservices Patterns With examples in Java 1st edition

> Extracted from: `2. Microservices Patterns With examples in Java 1st edition.pdf` (pages 175-230)
> Total pages in PDF: 522

---

## Page 175

145
Summary
 CreateOrderSaga is only one of Order Service’s many sagas. Many of its other sys-
tem operations also use sagas. For example, the cancelOrder() operation uses a Can-
cel Order Saga, and the reviseOrder() operation uses a Revise Order Saga. As a
result, even though many services have an external API that uses a synchronous proto-
col, such as REST or gRPC, a large amount of interservice communication will use
asynchronous messaging.
 As you can see, transaction management and some aspects of business logic design
are quite different in a microservice architecture. Fortunately, saga orchestrators are
usually quite simple state machines, and you can use a saga framework to simplify your
code. Nevertheless, transaction management is certainly more complicated than in a
monolithic architecture. But that’s usually a small price to pay for the tremendous
benefits of microservices. 
Summary
Some system operations need to update data scattered across multiple services.
Traditional, XA/2PC-based distributed transactions aren’t a good fit for mod-
ern applications. A better approach is to use the Saga pattern. A saga is sequence
of local transactions that are coordinated using messaging. Each local transac-
tion updates data in a single service. Because each local transaction commits its
changes, if a saga must roll back due to the violation of a business rule, it must
execute compensating transactions to explicitly undo changes.
You can use either choreography or orchestration to coordinate the steps of a
saga. In a choreography-based saga, a local transaction publishes events that trig-
ger other participants to execute local transactions. In an orchestration-based
saga, a centralized saga orchestrator sends command messages to participants
telling them to execute local transactions. You can simplify development and test-
ing by modeling saga orchestrators as state machines. Simple sagas can use chore-
ography, but orchestration is usually a better approach for complex sagas.
Designing saga-based business logic can be challenging because, unlike ACID
transactions, sagas aren’t isolated from one another. You must often use counter-
measures, which are design strategies that prevent concurrency anomalies
caused by the ACD transaction model. An application may even need to use
locking in order to simplify the business logic, even though that risks deadlocks.

---

## Page 176

146
Designing
business logic in
a microservice architecture
The heart of an enterprise application is the business logic, which implements the
business rules. Developing complex business logic is always challenging. The FTGO
application’s business logic implements some quite complex business logic, espe-
cially for order management and delivery management. Mary had encouraged her
team to apply object-oriented design principles, because in her experience this was
the best way to implement complex business logic. Some of the business logic used
the procedural Transcription script pattern. But the majority of the FTGO applica-
tion’s business logic is implemented in an object-oriented domain model that’s
mapped to the database using JPA.
 Developing complex business logic is even more challenging in a microservice
architecture where the business logic is spread over multiple services. You need to
This chapter covers
Applying the business logic organization patterns: 
Transaction script pattern and Domain model 
pattern
Designing business logic with the Domain-driven 
design (DDD) aggregate pattern
Applying the Domain event pattern in a 
microservice architecture

---

## Page 177

147
Business logic organization patterns
address two key challenges. First, a typical domain model is a tangled web of intercon-
nected classes. Although this isn’t a problem in a monolithic application, in a micro-
service architecture, where classes are scattered around different services, you need to
eliminate object references that would otherwise span service boundaries. The second
challenge is designing business logic that works within the transaction management
constraints of a microservice architecture. Your business logic can use ACID transac-
tions within services, but as described in chapter 4, it must use the Saga pattern to
maintain data consistency across services.
 Fortunately, we can address these issues by using the Aggregate pattern from
DDD. The Aggregate pattern structures a service’s business logic as a collection of
aggregates. An aggregate is a cluster of objects that can be treated as a unit. There are
two reasons why aggregates are useful when developing business logic in a micro-
service architecture:
Aggregates avoid any possibility of object references spanning service boundar-
ies, because an inter-aggregate reference is a primary key value rather than an
object reference.
Because a transaction can only create or update a single aggregate, aggregates
fit the constraints of the microservices transaction model.
As a result, an ACID transaction is guaranteed to be within a single service.
 I begin this chapter by describing the different ways of organizing business logic:
the Transcription script pattern and the Domain model pattern. Next I introduce the
concept of a DDD aggregate and explain why it’s a good building block for a service’s
business logic. After that, I describe the Domain event pattern events and explain why
it’s useful for a service to publish events. I end this chapter with a couple of examples
of business logic from Kitchen Service and Order Service.
 Let’s now look at business logic organization patterns.
5.1
Business logic organization patterns
Figure 5.1 shows the architecture of a typical service. As described in chapter 2, the
business logic is the core of a hexagonal architecture. Surrounding the business logic
are the inbound and outbound adapters. An inbound adapter handles requests from cli-
ents and invokes the business logic. An outbound adapter, which is invoked by the busi-
ness logic, invokes other services and applications.
 This service consists of the business logic and the following adapters:

REST API adapter—An inbound adapter that implements a REST API which
invokes the business logic

OrderCommandHandlers—An inbound adapter that consumes command mes-
sages from a message channel and invokes the business logic

Database Adapter—An outbound adapter that’s invoked by the business logic
to access the database

Domain Event Publishing Adapter—An outbound adapter that publishes events
to a message broker

---

## Page 178

148
CHAPTER 5
Designing business logic in a microservice architecture
The business logic is typically the most complex part of the service. When develop-
ing business logic, you should consciously organize your business logic in the way
that’s most appropriate for your application. After all, I’m sure you’ve experienced
the frustration of having to maintain someone else’s badly structured code. Most
enterprise applications are written in an object-oriented language such as Java, so
they consist of classes and methods. But using an object-oriented language doesn’t
guarantee that the business logic has an object-oriented design. The key decision you
must make when developing business logic is whether to use an object-oriented
approach or a procedural approach. There are two main patterns for organizing
Outbound adapters
Inbound adapters
Order
Service requests
POST/orders
GET/order/Id
REST API
Order database
Order Service
business logic
Order
command
handlers
Order events
Domain event
publisher adapter
Database
adapter
Figure 5.1
The Order Service has a hexagonal architecture. It consists of the business logic 
and one or more adapters that interface with external applications and other services.

---

## Page 179

149
Business logic organization patterns
business logic: the procedural Transaction script pattern, and the object-oriented
Domain model pattern.
5.1.1
Designing business logic using the Transaction script pattern
Although I’m a strong advocate of the object-oriented approach, there are some situa-
tions where it is overkill, such as when you are developing simple business logic. In such
a situation, a better approach is to write procedural code and use what the book Patterns
of Enterprise Application Architecture by Martin Fowler (Addison-Wesley Professional, 2002)
calls the Transaction script pattern. Rather than doing any object-oriented design, you
write a method called a transaction script to handle each request from the presentation
tier. As figure 5.2 shows, an important characteristic of this approach is that the classes
that implement behavior are separate from those that store state.
When using the Transaction script pattern, the scripts are usually located in service
classes, which in this example is the OrderService class. A service class has one
method for each request/system operation. The method implements the business
logic for that request. It accesses the database using data access objects (DAOs), such
as the OrderDao. The data objects, which in this example is the Order class, are pure
data with little or no behavior.
This style of design is highly procedural and relies on few of the capabilities of object-
oriented programming (OOP) languages. This what you would create if you were writ-
ing the application in C or another non-OOP language. Nevertheless, you shouldn’t be
Pattern: Transaction script
Organize the business logic as a collection of procedural transaction scripts, one for
each type of request.
createOrder()
reviseOrder()
cancelOrder()
...
OrderService
Classes with
behavior
Classes
with state
save(Order)
ﬁndOrderById()
...
OrderDao
orderId
orderLineItems
...
Order
Figure 5.2
Organizing business logic 
as transaction scripts. In a typical 
transaction script–based design, one 
set of classes implements behavior 
and another set stores state. The 
transaction scripts are organized into 
classes that typically have no state. 
The scripts use data classes, which 
typically have no behavior.

---

## Page 180

150
CHAPTER 5
Designing business logic in a microservice architecture
ashamed to use a procedural design when it’s appropriate. This approach works well
for simple business logic. The drawback is that this tends not to be a good way to
implement complex business logic. 
5.1.2
Designing business logic using the Domain model pattern
The simplicity of the procedural approach can be quite seductive. You can write code with-
out having to carefully consider how to organize the classes. The problem is that if your
business logic becomes complex, you can end up with code that’s a nightmare to main-
tain. In fact, in the same way that a monolithic application has a habit of continually grow-
ing, transaction scripts have the same problem. Consequently, unless you’re writing an
extremely simple application, you should resist the temptation to write procedural code
and instead apply the Domain model pattern and develop an object-oriented design.
In an object-oriented design, the business logic consists of an object model, a network
of relatively small classes. These classes typically correspond directly to concepts from
the problem domain. In such a design some classes have only either state or behavior,
but many contain both, which is the hallmark of a well-designed class. Figure 5.3
shows an example of the Domain model pattern.
Pattern: Domain model
Organize the business logic as an object model consisting of classes that have state
and behavior.
createOrder()
reviseOrder()
cancelOrder()
...
OrderService
deliveryTime
deliveryAddress
DeliveryInformation
ﬁndOrderById()
...
OrderRepository
Some classes have only state.
Many classes have
state and behavior.
Uses
Some classes have only behavior.
«private»
orderId
orderLineItems
...
revise()
cancel()
«static»
create()
Order
Figure 5.3
Organizing business logic as a domain model. The majority of 
the business logic consists of classes that have state and behavior.

---

## Page 181

151
Business logic organization patterns
As with the Transaction script pattern, an OrderService class has a method for each
request/system operation. But when using the Domain model pattern, the service
methods are usually simple. That’s because a service method almost always delegates
to persistent domain objects, which contain the bulk of the business logic. A service
method might, for example, load a domain object from the database and invoke one
of its methods. In this example, the Order class has both state and behavior. Moreover,
its state is private and can only be accessed indirectly via its methods.
 Using an object-oriented design has a number of benefits. First, the design is
easy to understand and maintain. Instead of consisting of one big class that does
everything, it consists of a number of small classes that each have a small number of
responsibilities. In addition, classes such as Account, BankingTransaction, and
OverdraftPolicy closely mirror the real world, which makes their role in the design
easier to understand. Second, our object-oriented design is easier to test: each class
can and should be tested independently. Finally, an object-oriented design is easier to
extend because it can use well-known design patterns, such as the Strategy pattern and
the Template method pattern, that define ways of extending a component without
modifying the code.
 The Domain model pattern works well, but there are a number of problems with
this approach, especially in a microservice architecture. To address those problems,
you need to use a refinement of OOD known as DDD. 
5.1.3
About Domain-driven design
DDD, which is described in the book Domain-Driven Design by Eric Evans (Addison-
Wesley Professional, 2003), is a refinement of OOD and is an approach for developing
complex business logic. I introduced DDD in chapter 2 when discussing the useful-
ness of DDD subdomains when decomposing an application into services. When using
DDD, each service has its own domain model, which avoids the problems of a single,
application-wide domain model. Subdomains and the associated concept of Bounded
Context are two of the strategic DDD patterns.
 DDD also has some tactical patterns that are building blocks for domain models.
Each pattern is a role that a class plays in a domain model and defines the characteris-
tics of the class. The building blocks that have been widely adopted by developers
include the following:
Entity—An object that has a persistent identity. Two entities whose attributes
have the same values are still different objects. In a Java EE application, classes
that are persisted using JPA @Entity are usually DDD entities.
Value object—An object that is a collection of values. Two value objects whose
attributes have the same values can be used interchangeably. An example of a
value object is a Money class, which consists of a currency and an amount.
Factory—An object or method that implements object creation logic that’s too
complex to be done directly by a constructor. It can also hide the concrete

---

## Page 182

152
CHAPTER 5
Designing business logic in a microservice architecture
classes that are instantiated. A factory might be implemented as a static method
of a class.
Repository—An object that provides access to persistent entities and encapsu-
lates the mechanism for accessing the database.
Service—An object that implements business logic that doesn’t belong in an
entity or a value object.
These building blocks are used by many developers. Some are supported by frame-
works such as JPA and the Spring framework. There is one more building block that
has been generally ignored (myself included!) except by DDD purists: aggregates. As
it turns out, aggregates are an extremely useful concept when developing microser-
vices. Let’s first look at some subtle problems with classic OOD that are solved by
using aggregates. 
5.2
Designing a domain model using the 
DDD aggregate pattern
In traditional object-oriented design, a domain model is a collection of classes and
relationships between classes. The classes are usually organized into packages. For
example, figure 5.4 shows part of a domain model for the FTGO application. It’s a typ-
ical domain model consisting of a web of interconnected classes.
This example has several classes corresponding to business objects: Consumer, Order,
Restaurant, and Courier. But interestingly, the explicit boundaries of each business
object are missing from this kind of traditional domain model. It doesn’t specify, for
Consumer
Order
state
...
creditcardId
...
deliveryTime
quantity
name
price
street1
street2
city
state
zip
name
...
available
...
lat
lon
Restaurant
Courier
Location
PaymentInfo
DeliveryInfo
OrderLineItem
MenuItem
Address
Placed by
For
Assigned to
Paid using
Pays using
Figure 5.4
A traditional domain model is a web of interconnected classes. It doesn’t explicitly specify the 
boundaries of business objects, such as Consumer and Order.

---

## Page 183

153
Designing a domain model using the DDD aggregate pattern
example, which classes are part of the Order business object. This lack of boundaries
can sometimes cause problems, especially in microservice architecture.
 I begin this section with an example problem caused by the lack of explicit bound-
aries. Next I describe the concept of an aggregate and how it has explicit boundaries.
After that, I describe the rules that aggregates must obey and how they make aggre-
gates a good fit for the microservice architecture. I then describe how to carefully
choose the boundaries of your aggregates and why it matters. Finally, I discuss how to
design business logic using aggregates. Let’s first take a look at the problems caused
by fuzzy boundaries.
5.2.1
The problem with fuzzy boundaries
Imagine, for example, that you want to perform an operation, such as a load or delete,
on an Order business object. What exactly does that mean? What is the scope an oper-
ation? You would certainly load or delete the Order object. But in reality there’s more
to an Order than simply the Order object. There are also the order line items, the pay-
ment information, and so on. Figure 5.4 leaves the boundaries of a domain object to
the developer’s intuition.
 Besides a conceptual fuzziness, the lack of explicit boundaries causes problems
when updating a business object. A typical business object has invariants, business
rules that must be enforced at all times. An Order has a minimum order amount, for
example. The FTGO application must ensure that any attempt to update an order
doesn’t violate an invariant such as the minimum order amount. The challenge is that
in order to enforce invariants, you must design your business logic carefully.
 For example, let’s look at how to ensure the order minimum is met when multiple
consumers work together to create an order. Two consumers—Sam and Mary—are
working together on an order and simultaneously decide that the order exceeds their
budget. Sam reduces the quantity of samosas, and Mary reduces the quantity of naan
bread. From the application’s perspective, both consumers retrieve the order and its
line items from the database. Both consumers then update a line item to reduce the
cost of the order. From each consumer’s perspective the order minimum is preserved.
Here’s the sequence of database transactions.
Consumer - Mary
Consumer - Sam
BEGIN TXN
SELECT ORDER_TOTAL FROM ORDER
WHERE ORDER ID = X
SELECT * FROM ORDER_LINE_ITEM
WHERE ORDER_ID = X
...
END TXN
BEGIN TXN
SELECT ORDER_TOTAL FROM ORDER
WHERE ORDER ID = X
SELECT * FROM ORDER_LINE_ITEM
WHERE ORDER_ID = X
...
END TXN
Verify minimum is met

---

## Page 184

154
CHAPTER 5
Designing business logic in a microservice architecture
Each consumer changes a line item using a sequence of two transactions. The first
transaction loads the order and its line items. The UI verifies that the order minimum
is satisfied before executing the second transaction. The second transaction updates
the line item quantity using an optimistic offline locking check that verifies that the
order line is unchanged since it was loaded by the first transaction.
 In this scenario, Sam reduces the order total by $X and Mary reduces it by $Y. As a
result, the Order is no longer valid, even though the application verified that the order
still satisfied the order minimum after each consumer’s update. As you can see, directly
updating part of a business object can result in the violation of the business rules. DDD
aggregates are intended to solve this problem. 
5.2.2
Aggregates have explicit boundaries
An aggregate is a cluster of domain objects within a boundary that can be treated as a
unit. It consists of a root entity and possibly one or more other entities and value
objects. Many business objects are modeled as aggregates. For example, in chapter 2
we created a rough domain model by analyzing the nouns used in the requirements
and by domain experts. Many of these nouns, such as Order, Consumer, and Restau-
rant, are aggregates.
Figure 5.5 shows the Order aggregate and its boundary. An Order aggregate consists of
an Order entity, one or more OrderLineItem value objects, and other value objects
such as a delivery Address and PaymentInformation.
BEGIN TXN
UPDATE ORDER_LINE_ITEM
SET VERSION=..., QUANTITY=...
WHERE VERSION = <loaded version>
AND ID = ...
END TXN
Verify minimum is met
BEGIN TXN
UPDATE ORDER_LINE_ITEM
SET VERSION=..., QUANTITY=...
WHERE VERSION = <loaded version>
AND ID = ...
END TXN
Pattern: Aggregate
Organize a domain model as a collection of aggregates, each of which is a graph of
objects that can be treated as a unit.

---

## Page 185

155
Designing a domain model using the DDD aggregate pattern
Aggregates decompose a domain model into chunks, which are individually easier to
understand. They also clarify the scope of operations such as load, update, and delete.
These operations act on the entire aggregate rather than on parts of it. An aggregate
is often loaded in its entirety from the database, thereby avoiding any complications of
lazy loading. Deleting an aggregate removes all of its objects from a database.
AGGREGATES ARE CONSISTENCY BOUNDARIES
Updating an entire aggregate rather than its parts solves the consistency issues, such
as the example described earlier. Update operations are invoked on the aggregate
root, which enforces invariants. Also, concurrency is handled by locking the aggregate
root using, for example, a version number or a database-level lock. For example,
instead of updating line items’ quantities directly, a client must invoke a method on
the root of the Order aggregate, which enforces invariants such as the minimum order
amount. Note, though, that this approach doesn’t require the entire aggregate to be
updated in the database. An application might, for example, only update the rows cor-
responding to the Order object and the updated OrderLineItem. 
IDENTIFYING AGGREGATES IS KEY
In DDD, a key part of designing a domain model is identifying aggregates, their
boundaries, and their roots. The details of the aggregates’ internal structure is sec-
ondary. The benefit of aggregates, however, goes far beyond modularizing a domain
model. That’s because aggregates must obey certain rules. 
5.2.3
Aggregate rules
DDD requires aggregates to obey a set of rules. These rules ensure that an aggregate is
a self-contained unit that can enforce its invariants. Let’s look at each of the rules.
«
»
aggregate root
Order
quantity
«
»
aggregate root
Consumer
Order aggregate
Consumer aggregate
...
«
»
aggregate root
Restaurant
«
»
value object
OrderLineItem
Restaurant aggregate
«
»
value object
DeliveryInfo
«
»
value object
PaymentInfo
«
»
value object
DeliveryInfo
«
»
value object
PaymentInfo
Figure 5.5
Structuring a domain model as a set of aggregates makes the boundaries explicit.

---

## Page 186

156
CHAPTER 5
Designing business logic in a microservice architecture
RULE #1: REFERENCE ONLY THE AGGREGATE ROOT
The previous example illustrated the perils of updating OrderLineItems directly. The
goal of the first aggregate rule is to eliminate this problem. It requires that the root
entity be the only part of an aggregate that can be referenced by classes outside of the
aggregate. A client can only update an aggregate by invoking a method on the aggre-
gate root.
 A service, for example, uses a repository to load an aggregate from the database
and obtain a reference to the aggregate root. It updates an aggregate by invoking a
method on the aggregate root. This rule ensures that the aggregate can enforce its
invariant.
RULE #2: INTER-AGGREGATE REFERENCES MUST USE PRIMARY KEYS
Another rule is that aggregates reference each other by identity (for example, primary
key) instead of object references. For example, as figure 5.6 shows, an Order refer-
ences its Consumer using a consumerId rather than a reference to the Consumer object.
Similarly, an Order references a Restaurant using a restaurantId.
This approach is quite different from traditional object modeling, which considers
foreign keys in the domain model to be a design smell. It has a number of benefits.
The use of identity rather than object references means that the aggregates are loosely
coupled. It ensures that the aggregate boundaries between aggregates are well
defined and avoids accidentally updating a different aggregate. Also, if an aggregate is
part of another service, there isn’t a problem of object references that span services.
 This approach also simplifies persistence since the aggregate is the unit of storage.
It makes it easier to store aggregates in a NoSQL database such as MongoDB. It also
consumerId
restaurantId
...
«
»
aggregate root
Order
quantity
OrderLineItem
DeliveryInfo
...
«
»
aggregate root
Consumer
Order aggregate
Consumer aggregate
...
«
»
aggregate root
Restaurant
Restaurant aggregate
PaymentInfo
DeliveryInfo
PaymentInfo
Figure 5.6
References between aggregates are by primary key rather than by object reference. The 
Order aggregate has the IDs of the Consumer and Restaurant aggregates. Within an aggregate, 
objects have references to one another.

---

## Page 187

157
Designing a domain model using the DDD aggregate pattern
eliminates the need for transparent lazy loading and its associated problems. Scaling
the database by sharding aggregates is relatively straightforward.
RULE #3: ONE TRANSACTION CREATES OR UPDATES ONE AGGREGATE
Another rule that aggregates must obey is that a transaction can only create or update
a single aggregate. When I first read about it many years ago, this rule made no sense! At
the time, I was developing traditional monolithic applications that used an RDBMS, so
transactions could update multiple aggregates. Today, this constraint is perfect for the
microservice architecture. It ensures that a transaction is contained within a service.
This constraint also matches the limited transaction model of most NoSQL databases.
 This rule makes it more complicated to implement operations that need to create
or update multiple aggregates. But this is exactly the problem that sagas (described in
chapter 4) are designed to solve. Each step of the saga creates or updates exactly one
aggregate. Figure 5.7 shows how this works.
In this example, the saga consists of three transactions. The first transaction updates
aggregate X in service A. The other two transactions are both in service B. One transac-
tion updates aggregate X, and the other updates aggregate Y.
 An alternative approach to maintaining consistency across multiple aggregates
within a single service is to cheat and update multiple aggregates within a transaction.
For example, service B could update aggregates Y and Z in a single transaction. This is
only possible when using a database, such as an RDBMS, that supports a rich transac-
tion model. If you’re using a NoSQL database that only has simple transactions,
there’s no other option except to use sagas.
 Or is there? It turns out that aggregate boundaries are not set in stone. When
developing a domain model, you get to choose where the boundaries lie. But like a
20th century colonial power drawing national boundaries, you need to be careful. 
Service A
Saga
Local transaction 1
Create/update
Aggregate X
Service B
Local transaction 2
Aggregate Y
Local transaction 3
Aggregate Z
Create/update
Create/update
Figure 5.7
A transaction can only create or update a single aggregate, so an application uses a saga 
to update multiple aggregates. Each step of the saga creates or updates one aggregate.

---

## Page 188

158
CHAPTER 5
Designing business logic in a microservice architecture
5.2.4
Aggregate granularity
When developing a domain model, a key decision you must make is how large to
make each aggregate. On one hand, aggregates should ideally be small. Because
updates to each aggregate are serialized, more fine-grained aggregates will increase
the number of simultaneous requests that the application can handle, improving scal-
ability. It will also improve the user experience because it reduces the chance of two
users attempting conflicting updates of the same aggregate. On the other hand, because
an aggregate is the scope of transaction, you may need to define a larger aggregate in
order to make a particular update atomic.
 For example, earlier I mentioned how in the FTGO application’s domain model
Order and Consumer are separate aggregates. An alternative design is to make Order
part of the Consumer aggregate. Figure 5.8 shows this alternative design.
A benefit of this larger Consumer aggregate is that the application can atomically
update a Consumer and one or more of its Orders. A drawback of this approach is that
it reduces scalability. Transactions that update different orders for the same customer
would be serialized. Similarly, two users would conflict if they attempted to edit differ-
ent orders for the same customer.
 Another drawback of this approach in a microservice architecture is that it is an
obstacle to decomposition. The business logic for Orders and Consumers, for exam-
ple, must be collocated in the same service, which makes the service larger. Because of
these issues, making aggregates as fine-grained as possible is best. 
restaurantId
...
Order
quantity
OrderLineItem
DeliveryInfo
...
<<aggregate root>>
Consumer
Consumer aggregate
...
<<aggregate root>>
Restaurant
Restaurant aggregate
PaymentInfo
DeliveryInfo
PaymentInfo
Figure 5.8
An alternative design defines a Customer aggregate that contains the Customer and 
Order classes. This design enables an application to atomically update a Consumer and one or more 
of its Orders.

---

## Page 189

159
Designing a domain model using the DDD aggregate pattern
5.2.5
Designing business logic with aggregates
In a typical (micro)service, the bulk of the business logic consists of aggregates. The
rest of the business logic resides in the domain services and the sagas. The sagas orches-
trate sequences of local transactions in order to enforce data consistency. The services
are the entry points into the business logic and are invoked by inbound adapters. A
service uses a repository to retrieve aggregates from the database or save aggregates to
the database. Each repository is implemented by an outbound adapter that accesses
the database. Figure 5.9 shows the aggregate-based design of the business logic for the
Order Service.
The business logic consists of the Order aggregate, the OrderService service class, the
OrderRepository, and one or more sagas. The OrderService invokes the Order-
Repository to save and load Orders. For simple requests that are local to the service,
REST API
Domain
event
publisher
«service»
OrderService
«saga»
CreateOrder
Saga
«saga»
ReviseOrder
Saga
createOrder()
reviseOrder()
cancelOrder()
«value object»
OrderLineItem
quantity
menuItem
name
Order
command
handlers
Database
adapter
«aggregate»
Order
id
...
«repository»
OrderRepository
voidSave(Order)
Orer ﬁndOne(id)
...
Figure 5.9
An aggregate-based design for the Order Service business logic

---

## Page 190

160
CHAPTER 5
Designing business logic in a microservice architecture
the service updates an Order aggregate. If an update request spans multiple services,
the OrderService will also create a saga, as described in chapter 4.
 We’ll take a look at the code—but first, let’s examine a concept that’s closely
related to aggregates: domain events. 
5.3
Publishing domain events
Merriam-Webster (https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/event) lists several
definitions of the word event, including these:
1
Something that happens
2
A noteworthy happening
3
A social occasion or activity
4
An adverse or damaging medical occurrence, a heart attack or other cardiac event
In the context of DDD, a domain event is something that has happened to an aggre-
gate. It’s represented by a class in the domain model. An event usually represents a
state change. Consider, for example, an Order aggregate in the FTGO application. Its
state-changing events include Order Created, Order Cancelled, Order Shipped, and
so forth. An Order aggregate might, if there are interested consumers, publish one of
the events each time it undergoes a state transition.
5.3.1
Why publish change events?
Domain events are useful because other parties—users, other applications, or other
components within the same application—are often interested in knowing about an
aggregate’s state changes. Here are some example scenarios:
Maintaining data consistency across services using choreography-based sagas,
described in chapter 4.
Notifying a service that maintains a replica that the source data has changed.
This approach is known as Command Query Responsibility Segregation (CQRS),
and it’s described in chapter 7.
Notifying a different application via a registered webhook or via a message bro-
ker in order to trigger the next step in a business process.
Notifying a different component of the same application in order, for example,
to send a WebSocket message to a user’s browser or update a text database such
as ElasticSearch.
Sending notifications—text messages or emails—to users informing them that
their order has shipped, their Rx prescription is ready for pick up, or their
flight is delayed.
Pattern: Domain event
An aggregate publishes a domain event when it’s created or undergoes some other
significant change.

---

## Page 191

161
Publishing domain events
Monitoring domain events to verify that the application is behaving correctly.
Analyzing events to model user behavior.
The trigger for the notification in all these scenarios is the state change of an aggre-
gate in an application’s database. 
5.3.2
What is a domain event?
A domain event is a class with a name formed using a past-participle verb. It has proper-
ties that meaningfully convey the event. Each property is either a primitive value or a
value object. For example, an OrderCreated event class has an orderId property.
 A domain event typically also has metadata, such as the event ID, and a timestamp.
It might also have the identity of the user who made the change, because that’s useful
for auditing. The metadata can be part of the event object, perhaps defined in a
superclass. Alternatively, the event metadata can be in an envelope object that wraps
the event object. The ID of the aggregate that emitted the event might also be part of
the envelope rather than an explicit event property.
 The OrderCreated event is an example of a domain event. It doesn’t have any
fields, because the Order’s ID is part of the event envelope. The following listing
shows the OrderCreated event class and the DomainEventEnvelope class.
interface DomainEvent {}
interface OrderDomainEvent extends DomainEvent {}
class OrderCreated implements OrderDomainEvent {}
class DomainEventEnvelope<T extends DomainEvent> {
private String aggregateType;      
private Object aggregateId;
private T event;
...
}
The DomainEvent interface is a marker interface that identifies a class as a domain
event. OrderDomainEvent is a marker interface for events, such as OrderCreated, which
are published by the Order aggregate. The DomainEventEnvelope is a class that con-
tains event metadata and the event object. It’s a generic class that’s parameterized by
the domain event type. 
5.3.3
Event enrichment
Let’s imagine, for example, that you’re writing an event consumer that processes Order
events. The OrderCreated event class shown previously captures the essence of what has
happened. But your event consumer may need the order details when processing an
Listing 5.1
The OrderCreated event and the DomainEventEnvelope class
The event’s 
metadata

---

## Page 192

162
CHAPTER 5
Designing business logic in a microservice architecture
OrderCreated event. One option is for it to retrieve that information from the Order-
Service. The drawback of an event consumer querying the service for the aggregate is
that it incurs the overhead of a service request.
 An alternative approach known as event enrichment is for events to contain informa-
tion that consumers need. It simplifies event consumers because they no longer need
to request that data from the service that published the event. In the OrderCreated
event, the Order aggregate can enrich the event by including the order details. The
following listing shows the enriched event.
class OrderCreated implements OrderEvent {
private List<OrderLineItem> lineItems;
private DeliveryInformation deliveryInformation;       
private PaymentInformation paymentInformation;
private long restaurantId;
private String restaurantName;
...
}
Because this version of the OrderCreated event contains the order details, an event
consumer, such as the Order History Service (discussed in chapter 7) no longer
needs to fetch that data when processing an OrderCreated event.
 Although event enrichment simplifies consumers, the drawback is that it risks mak-
ing the event classes less stable. An event class potentially needs to change whenever
the requirements of its consumers change. This can reduce maintainability because
this kind of change can impact multiple parts of the application. Satisfying every con-
sumer can also be a futile effort. Fortunately, in many situations it’s fairly obvious
which properties to include in an event.
 Now that we’ve covered the basics of domain events, let’s look at how to discover
them. 
5.3.4
Identifying domain events
There are a few different strategies for identifying domain events. Often the require-
ments will describe scenarios where notifications are required. The requirements
might include language such as “When X happens do Y.” For example, one require-
ment in the FTGO application is “When an Order is placed send the consumer an
email.” A requirement for a notification suggests the existence of a domain event.
 Another approach, which is increasing in popularity, is to use event storming. Event
storming is an event-centric workshop format for understanding a complex domain. It
involves gathering domain experts in a room, lots of sticky notes, and a very large sur-
face—a whiteboard or paper roll—to stick the notes on. The result of event storming
is an event-centric domain model consisting of aggregates and events.
 
Listing 5.2
The enriched OrderCreated event 
Data that its 
consumers 
typically need

---

## Page 193

163
Publishing domain events
 Event storming consist of three main steps:
1
Brainstorm events—Ask the domain experts to brainstorm the domain events.
Domain events are represented by orange sticky notes that are laid out in a
rough timeline on the modeling surface.
2
Identify event triggers—Ask the domain experts to identify the trigger of each
event, which is one of the following:
– User actions, represented as a command using a blue sticky note
– External system, represented by a purple sticky note
– Another domain event
– Passing of time
3
Identify aggregates—Ask the domain experts to identify the aggregate that con-
sumes each command and emits the corresponding event. Aggregates are rep-
resented by yellow sticky notes.
Figure 5.10 shows the result of an event-storming workshop. In just a couple of hours,
the participants identified numerous domain events, commands, and aggregates. It
was a good first step in the process of creating a domain model.
Event storming is a useful technique for quickly creating a domain model.
 Now that we’ve covered the basics of domain events, let’s look at the mechanics of
generating and publishing them. 
Event
Command
Aggregate
Policy
Figure 5.10
The result of an event-storming workshop that lasted a couple of hours. The sticky notes 
are events, which are laid out along a timeline; commands, which represent user actions; and 
aggregates, which emit events in response to a command.

---

## Page 194

164
CHAPTER 5
Designing business logic in a microservice architecture
5.3.5
Generating and publishing domain events
Communicating using domain events is a form of asynchronous messaging, discussed
in chapter 3. But before the business logic can publish them to a message broker, it
must first create them. Let’s look at how to do that.
GENERATING DOMAIN EVENTS
Conceptually, domain events are published by aggregates. An aggregate knows when
its state changes and hence what event to publish. An aggregate could invoke a mes-
saging API directly. The drawback of this approach is that because aggregates can’t
use dependency injection, the messaging API would need to be passed around as a
method argument. That would intertwine infrastructure concerns and business logic,
which is extremely undesirable.
 A better approach is to split responsibility between the aggregate and the service
(or equivalent class) that invokes it. Services can use dependency injection to obtain a
reference to the messaging API, easily publishing events. The aggregate generates the
events whenever its state changes and returns them to the service. There are a couple
of different ways an aggregate can return events back to the service. One option is for
the return value of an aggregate method to include a list of events. For example, the
following listing shows how a Ticket aggregate’s accept() method can return a Ticket-
AcceptedEvent to its caller.
public class Ticket {
public List<DomainEvent> accept(ZonedDateTime readyBy) {
...
this.acceptTime = ZonedDateTime.now();
  
this.readyBy = readyBy;
return singletonList(new TicketAcceptedEvent(readyBy));      
}
}
The service invokes the aggregate root’s method, and then publishes the events. For
example, the following listing shows how KitchenService invokes Ticket.accept() and
publishes the events.
public class KitchenService {
@Autowired
private TicketRepository ticketRepository;
@Autowired
private DomainEventPublisher domainEventPublisher;
Listing 5.3
The Ticket aggregate’s accept() method
Listing 5.4
KitchenService calls Ticket.accept() 
Updates 
the Ticket
Returns 
an event

---

## Page 195

165
Publishing domain events
public void accept(long ticketId, ZonedDateTime readyBy) {
Ticket ticket =
ticketRepository.findById(ticketId)
.orElseThrow(() ->
new TicketNotFoundException(ticketId));
List<DomainEvent> events = ticket.accept(readyBy);
domainEventPublisher.publish(Ticket.class, orderId, events);
}
The accept() method first invokes the TicketRepository to load the Ticket from the
database. It then updates the Ticket by calling accept(). KitchenService then pub-
lishes events returned by Ticket by calling DomainEventPublisher.publish(),
described shortly.
 This approach is quite simple. Methods that would otherwise have a void return
type now return List<Event>. The only potential drawback is that the return type of
non-void methods is now more complex. They must return an object containing the
original return value and List<Event>. You’ll see an example of such a method soon.
 Another option is for the aggregate root to accumulate events in a field. The ser-
vice then retrieves the events and publishes them. For example, the following listing
shows a variant of the Ticket class that works this way.
public class Ticket extends AbstractAggregateRoot {
public void accept(ZonedDateTime readyBy) {
...
this.acceptTime = ZonedDateTime.now();
this.readyBy = readyBy;
registerDomainEvent(new TicketAcceptedEvent(readyBy));
}
}
Ticket extends AbstractAggregateRoot, which defines a registerDomainEvent()
method that records the event. A service would call AbstractAggregateRoot.get-
DomainEvents() to retrieve those events.
 My preference is for the first option: the method returning events to the service.
But accumulating events in the aggregate root is also a viable option. In fact, the
Spring Data Ingalls release train (https://spring.io/blog/2017/01/30/what-s-new-in-
spring-data-release-ingalls) implements a mechanism that automatically publishes
events to the Spring ApplicationContext. The main drawback is that to reduce code
duplication, aggregate roots should extend a superclass such as AbstractAggregate-
Root, which might conflict with a requirement to extend some other superclass. Another
issue is that although it’s easy for the aggregate root’s methods to call register-
DomainEvent(), methods in other classes in the aggregate would find it challenging.
They would mostly likely need to somehow pass the events to the aggregate root. 
Listing 5.5
The Ticket extends a superclass, which records domain events
Publishes 
domain 
events

---

## Page 196

166
CHAPTER 5
Designing business logic in a microservice architecture
HOW TO RELIABLY PUBLISH DOMAIN EVENTS?
Chapter 3 talks about how to reliably send messages as part of a local database transac-
tion. Domain events are no different. A service must use transactional messaging to
publish events to ensure that they’re published as part of the transaction that updates
the aggregate in the database. The Eventuate Tram framework, described in chapter 3,
implements such a mechanism. It insert events into an OUTBOX table as part of the
ACID transaction that updates the database. After the transaction commits, the events
that were inserted into the OUTBOX table are then published to the message broker.
 The Tram framework provides a DomainEventPublisher interface, shown in the
following listing. It defines several overloaded publish() methods that take the aggre-
gate type and ID as parameters, along with a list of domain events.
public interface DomainEventPublisher {
void publish(String aggregateType, Object aggregateId, 
List<DomainEvent> domainEvents);
It uses the Eventuate Tram framework’s MessageProducer interface to publish those
events transactionally.
 A service could call the DomainEventPublisher publisher directly. But one draw-
back of doing so is that it doesn’t ensure that a service only publishes valid events.
KitchenService, for example, should only publish events that implement Ticket-
DomainEvent, which is the marker interface for the Ticket aggregate’s events. A better
option is for services to implement a subclass of AbstractAggregateDomainEvent-
Publisher, which is shown in listing 5.7. AbstractAggregateDomainEventPublisher
is an abstract class that provides a type-safe interface for publishing domain events.
It’s a generic class that has two type parameters, A, the aggregate type, and E, the
marker interface type for the domain events. A service publishes events by calling
the publish() method, which has two parameters: an aggregate of type A and a list of
events of type E.
public abstract class AbstractAggregateDomainEventPublisher<A, E extends Doma
inEvent> {
private Function<A, Object> idSupplier;
private DomainEventPublisher eventPublisher;
private Class<A> aggregateType;
protected AbstractAggregateDomainEventPublisher(
DomainEventPublisher eventPublisher,
Class<A> aggregateType,
Function<A, Object> idSupplier) {
this.eventPublisher = eventPublisher;
this.aggregateType = aggregateType;
Listing 5.6
The Eventuate Tram framework’s DomainEventPublisher interface
Listing 5.7
The abstract superclass of type-safe domain event publishers

---

## Page 197

167
Publishing domain events
this.idSupplier = idSupplier;
}
public void publish(A aggregate, List<E> events) {
eventPublisher.publish(aggregateType, idSupplier.apply(aggregate), 
(List<DomainEvent>) events);
}
}
The publish() method retrieves the aggregate’s ID and invokes DomainEventPublisher
.publish(). The following listing shows the TicketDomainEventPublisher, which
publishes domain events for the Ticket aggregate.
public class TicketDomainEventPublisher extends 
AbstractAggregateDomainEventPublisher<Ticket, TicketDomainEvent> {
public TicketDomainEventPublisher(DomainEventPublisher eventPublisher) {
super(eventPublisher, Ticket.class, Ticket::getId);
}
}
This class only publishes events that are a subclass of TicketDomainEvent.
 Now that we’ve looked at how to publish domain events, let’s see how to con-
sume them. 
5.3.6
Consuming domain events
Domain events are ultimately published as messages to a message broker, such as
Apache Kafka. A consumer could use the broker’s client API directly. But it’s more
convenient to use a higher-level API such as the Eventuate Tram framework’s Domain-
EventDispatcher, described in chapter 3. A DomainEventDispatcher dispatches
domain events to the appropriate handle method. Listing 5.9 shows an example event
handler class. KitchenServiceEventConsumer subscribes to events published by
Restaurant Service whenever a restaurant’s menu is updated. It’s responsible for
keeping Kitchen Service’s replica of the data up-to-date.
public class KitchenServiceEventConsumer {
@Autowired
private RestaurantService restaurantService;
public DomainEventHandlers domainEventHandlers() {       
return DomainEventHandlersBuilder
.forAggregateType("net.chrisrichardson.ftgo.restaurantservice.Restaurant")
.onEvent(RestaurantMenuRevised.class, this::reviseMenu)
Listing 5.8
A type-safe interface for publishing Ticket aggregates' domain events
Listing 5.9
Dispatching events to event handler methods
Maps events to 
event handlers

---

## Page 198

168
CHAPTER 5
Designing business logic in a microservice architecture
.build();
}
public void reviseMenu(DomainEventEnvelope<RestaurantMenuRevised> de) {  
long id = Long.parseLong(de.getAggregateId());
RestaurantMenu revisedMenu = de.getEvent().getRevisedMenu();
restaurantService.reviseMenu(id, revisedMenu);
}
}
The reviseMenu() method handles RestaurantMenuRevised events. It calls restaurant-
Service.reviseMenu(), which updates the restaurant’s menu. That method returns a
list of domain events, which are published by the event handler.
 Now that we’ve looked at aggregates and domain events, it’s time to consider some
example business logic that’s implemented using aggregates. 
5.4
Kitchen Service business logic
The first example is Kitchen Service, which enables a restaurant to manage their
orders. The two main aggregates in this service are the Restaurant and Ticket aggre-
gates. The Restaurant aggregate knows the restaurant’s menu and opening hours
and can validate orders. A Ticket represents an order that a restaurant must prepare
for pickup by a courier. Figure 5.11 shows these aggregates and other key parts of the
service’s business logic, as well as the service’s adapters.
 In addition to the aggregates, the other main parts of Kitchen Service’s business
logic are KitchenService, TicketRepository, and RestaurantRepository. Kitchen-
Service is the business logic’s entry. It defines methods for creating and updating
the Restaurant and Ticket aggregates. TicketRepository and RestaurantRepository
define methods for persisting Tickets and Restaurants respectively.
 The Kitchen Service service has three inbound adapters:

REST API—The REST API invoked by the user interface used by workers at the
restaurant. It invokes KitchenService to create and update Tickets.

KitchenServiceCommandHandler—The asynchronous request/response-based
API that’s invoked by sagas. It invokes KitchenService to create and update
Tickets.

KitchenServiceEventConsumer—Subscribes to events published by Restaurant
Service. It invokes KitchenService to create and update Restaurants.
The service also has two outbound adapters:

DB adapter—Implements the TicketRepository and the RestaurantRepository
interfaces and accesses the database.

DomainEventPublishingAdapter—Implements the DomainEventPublisher inter-
face and publishes Ticket domain events.
An event handler for the
RestaurantMenuRevised
event

---

## Page 199

169
Kitchen Service business logic
Let’s take a closer look at the design of KitchenService, starting with the Ticket
aggregate.
5.4.1
The Ticket aggregate
Ticket is one of the aggregates of Kitchen Service. As described in chapter 2, when
talking about the concept of a Bounded Context, this aggregate represents the restau-
rant kitchen’s view of an order. It doesn’t contain information about the consumer,
such as their identity, the delivery information, or payment details. It’s focused on
enabling a restaurant’s kitchen to prepare the Order for pickup. Moreover, Kitchen-
Service doesn’t generate a unique ID for this aggregate. Instead, it uses the ID sup-
plied by OrderService.
 Let’s first look at the structure of this class and then we’ll examine its methods.
Kitchen Service
command channel
Restaurant Events
channel
Ticket events
channel
Kitchen Service
database
Create ticket
Conﬁrm create ticket
Restaurant created
Restaurant menu revised
accept
reject
preparing
readyForPickup
pickedUp
REST API
Restaurant
Kitchen
Service
Domain event
publisher
«aggregate»
Ticket
«aggregate»
restaurant
«repository»
Ticket
Repository
«repository»
Restaurant
Repository
KitchenService
CommandHandler
KitchenService
EventConsumer
Database
adapter
Domain event
publishing adapter
Figure 5.11
The design of Kitchen Service

---

## Page 200

170
CHAPTER 5
Designing business logic in a microservice architecture
STRUCTURE OF THE TICKET CLASS
The following listing shows an excerpt of the code for this class. The Ticket class is
similar to a traditional domain class. The main difference is that references to other
aggregates are by primary key.
@Entity(table="tickets")
public class Ticket {
@Id
private Long id;
private TicketState state;
private Long restaurantId;
@ElementCollection
@CollectionTable(name="ticket_line_items")
private List<TicketLineItem> lineItems;
private ZonedDateTime readyBy;
private ZonedDateTime acceptTime;
private ZonedDateTime preparingTime;
private ZonedDateTime pickedUpTime;
private ZonedDateTime readyForPickupTime;
...
This class is persisted with JPA and is mapped to the TICKETS table. The restaurantId
field is a Long rather than an object reference to a Restaurant. The readyBy field
stores the estimate of when the order will be ready for pickup. The Ticket class has
several fields that track the history of the order, including acceptTime, preparing-
Time, and pickupTime. Let’s look at this class’s methods. 
BEHAVIOR OF THE TICKET AGGREGATE
The Ticket aggregate defines several methods. As you saw earlier, it has a static create()
method, which is a factory method that creates a Ticket. There are also some meth-
ods that are invoked when the restaurant updates the state of the order:

accept()—The restaurant has accepted the order.

preparing()—The restaurant has started preparing the order, which means the
order can no longer be changed or cancelled.

readyForPickup()—The order can now be picked up.
The following listing shows some of its methods.
 
 
 
 
Listing 5.10
Part of the Ticket class, which is a JPA entity

---

## Page 201

171
Kitchen Service business logic
public class Ticket {
public static ResultWithAggregateEvents<Ticket, TicketDomainEvent> 
create(Long id, TicketDetails details) {
return new ResultWithAggregateEvents<>(new Ticket(id, details), new 
TicketCreatedEvent(id, details));
}
public List<TicketPreparationStartedEvent> preparing() {
switch (state) {
case ACCEPTED:
this.state = TicketState.PREPARING;
this.preparingTime = ZonedDateTime.now();
return singletonList(new TicketPreparationStartedEvent());
default:
throw new UnsupportedStateTransitionException(state);
}
}
public List<TicketDomainEvent> cancel() {
switch (state) {
case CREATED:
case ACCEPTED:
this.state = TicketState.CANCELLED;
return singletonList(new TicketCancelled());
case READY_FOR_PICKUP:
throw new TicketCannotBeCancelledException();
default:
throw new UnsupportedStateTransitionException(state);
}
}
The create() method creates a Ticket. The preparing() method is called when the
restaurant starts preparing the order. It changes the state of the order to PREPARING,
records the time, and publishes an event. The cancel() method is called when a user
attempts to cancel an order. If the cancellation is allowed, this method changes the
state of the order and returns an event. Otherwise, it throws an exception. These
methods are invoked in response to REST API requests as well as events and com-
mand messages. Let’s look at the classes that invoke the aggregate’s method. 
THE KITCHENSERVICE DOMAIN SERVICE
KitchenService is invoked by the service’s inbound adapters. It defines various meth-
ods for changing the state of an order, including accept(), reject(), preparing(), and
others. Each method loads the specifies aggregate, calls the corresponding method on
the aggregate root, and publishes any domain events. The following listing shows its
accept() method.
Listing 5.11
Some of the Ticket's methods

---

## Page 202

172
CHAPTER 5
Designing business logic in a microservice architecture
public class KitchenService {
@Autowired
private TicketRepository ticketRepository;
@Autowired
private TicketDomainEventPublisher domainEventPublisher;
public void accept(long ticketId, ZonedDateTime readyBy) {
Ticket ticket =
ticketRepository.findById(ticketId)
.orElseThrow(() ->
new TicketNotFoundException(ticketId));
List<TicketDomainEvent> events = ticket.accept(readyBy);
domainEventPublisher.publish(ticket, events);          
}
}
The accept() method is invoked when the restaurant accepts a new order. It has two
parameters:

orderId—ID of the order to accept

readyBy—Estimated time when the order will be ready for pickup
This method retrieves the Ticket aggregate and calls its accept() method. It pub-
lishes any generated events.
 Now let’s look at the class that handles asynchronous commands. 
THE KITCHENSERVICECOMMANDHANDLER CLASS
The KitchenServiceCommandHandler class is an adapter that’s responsible for handling
command messages sent by the various sagas implemented by Order Service. This class
defines a handler method for each command, which invokes KitchenService to create
or update a Ticket. The following listing shows an excerpt of this class.
public class KitchenServiceCommandHandler {
@Autowired
private KitchenService kitchenService;
 public CommandHandlers commandHandlers() {
  
return CommandHandlersBuilder
.fromChannel("orderService")
.onMessage(CreateTicket.class, this::createTicket)
.onMessage(ConfirmCreateTicket.class,
this::confirmCreateTicket)
Listing 5.12
The service’s accept() method updates Ticket
Listing 5.13
Handling command messages sent by sagas
Publish 
domain 
events
Maps  command messages 
to message handlers

---

## Page 203

173
Order Service business logic
.onMessage(CancelCreateTicket.class,
this::cancelCreateTicket)
.build();
}
private Message createTicket(CommandMessage<CreateTicket>
cm) {
CreateTicket command = cm.getCommand();
long restaurantId = command.getRestaurantId();
Long ticketId = command.getOrderId();
TicketDetails ticketDetails =
command.getTicketDetails();
try {
Ticket ticket =
   
kitchenService.createTicket(restaurantId,
ticketId, ticketDetails);
CreateTicketReply reply =
new CreateTicketReply(ticket.getId());
return withSuccess(reply);
  
} catch (RestaurantDetailsVerificationException e) {
return withFailure();
}
}
private Message confirmCreateTicket
(CommandMessage<ConfirmCreateTicket> cm) {
  
Long ticketId = cm.getCommand().getTicketId();
kitchenService.confirmCreateTicket(ticketId);
return withSuccess();
}
...
All the command handler methods invoke KitchenService and reply with either a
success or a failure reply.
 Now that you’ve seen the business logic for a relatively simple service, we’ll look at
a more complex example: Order Service. 
5.5
Order Service business logic
As mentioned in earlier chapters, Order Service provides an API for creating, updat-
ing, and canceling orders. This API is primarily invoked by the consumer. Figure 5.12
shows the high-level design of the service. The Order aggregate is the central aggre-
gate of Order Service. But there’s also a Restaurant aggregate, which is a partial
replica of data owned by Restaurant Service. It enables Order Service to validate
and price an Order’s line items.
 In addition to the Order and Restaurant aggregates, the business logic consists of
OrderService, OrderRepository, RestaurantRepository, and various sagas such as
the CreateOrderSaga described in chapter 4. OrderService is the primary entry
point into the business logic and defines methods for creating and updated Orders
Invokes KitchenService 
to create the Ticket
Sends back a 
successful reply
Sends back a 
failure reply
Confirms 
the order

---

## Page 204

174
CHAPTER 5
Designing business logic in a microservice architecture
and Restaurants. OrderRepository defines methods for persisting Orders, and
RestaurantRepository has methods for persisting Restaurants. Order Service has
several inbound adapters:

REST API—The REST API invoked by the user interface used by consumers. It
invokes OrderService to create and update Orders.
Restaurant Events
channel
Order Service
command channel
Consumer Service
command channel
Kitchen Service
command channel
Accounting Service
command channel
Create order saga
reply channel
Cancel order saga
reply channel
Revise order saga
reply channel
Ticket events
channel
createOrder()
cancelOrder()
reviseOrder()
REST API
Consumer
OrderService
Domain event
publisher
Command
producer
«aggregate»
Restaurant
«aggregate»
Order
«repository»
OrderRepository
«repository»
Restaurant
Repository
OrderEvent
consumer
Order
command
handlers
SagaReply
message
adapter
Database
adapter
Outbound
command
message
adapter
«saga»
*OrderSaga
Order Service
database
Domain event
publishing
adapter
Figure 5.12
The design of the Order Service. It has a REST API for managing orders. It exchanges messages 
and events with other services via several message channels.

---

## Page 205

175
Order Service business logic

OrderEventConsumer—Subscribes to events published by Restaurant Service. It
invokes OrderService to create and update its replica of Restaurants.

OrderCommandHandlers—The asynchronous request/response-based API that’s
invoked by sagas. It invokes OrderService to update Orders.

SagaReplyAdapter—Subscribes to the saga reply channels and invokes the sagas.
The service also has some outbound adapters:

DB adapter—Implements the OrderRepository interface and accesses the Order
Service database

DomainEventPublishingAdapter—Implements the DomainEventPublisher inter-
face and publishes Order domain events

OutboundCommandMessageAdapter—Implements the CommandPublisher inter-
face and sends command messages to saga participants
Let’s first take a closer look at the Order aggregate and then examine OrderService.
5.5.1
The Order Aggregate
The Order aggregate represents an order placed by a consumer. We’ll first look at the
structure of the Order aggregate and then check out its methods.
THE STRUCTURE OF THE ORDER AGGREGATE
Figure 5.13 shows the structure of the Order aggregate. The Order class is the root of
the Order aggregate. The Order aggregate also consists of value objects such as Order-
LineItem, DeliveryInfo, and PaymentInfo.
«value object»
Address
street1
street2
city
state
zip
«aggregate»
Order
state
consumerId
restaurantId
...
Price
Order minimum
«value object»
OrderLineItem
quantity
menuItem
name
«value object»
DeliveryInfo
deliveryTime
«value object»
Money
amount
«value object»
PaymentInfo
paymentMethodId
Figure 5.13
The design of the Order aggregate, which consists of the Order aggregate root 
and various value objects.

---

## Page 206

176
CHAPTER 5
Designing business logic in a microservice architecture
The Order class has a collection of OrderLineItems. Because the Order’s Consumer
and Restaurant are other aggregates, it references them by primary key value. The
Order class has a DeliveryInfo class, which stores the delivery address and the
desired delivery time, and a PaymentInfo, which stores the payment info. The follow-
ing listing shows the code.
@Entity
@Table(name="orders")
@Access(AccessType.FIELD)
public class Order {
@Id
@GeneratedValue
private Long id;
@Version
private Long version;
private OrderState state;
private Long consumerId;
private Long restaurantId;
@Embedded
private OrderLineItems orderLineItems;
@Embedded
private DeliveryInformation deliveryInformation;
@Embedded
private PaymentInformation paymentInformation;
@Embedded
private Money orderMinimum;
This class is persisted with JPA and is mapped to the ORDERS table. The id field is the
primary key. The version field is used for optimistic locking. The state of an Order is
represented by the OrderState enumeration. The DeliveryInformation and Payment-
Information fields are mapped using the @Embedded annotation and are stored as col-
umns of the ORDERS table. The orderLineItems field is an embedded object that
contains the order line items. The Order aggregate consists of more than just fields. It
also implements business logic, which can be described by a state machine. Let’s take
a look at the state machine. 
THE ORDER AGGREGATE STATE MACHINE
In order to create or update an order, Order Service must collaborate with other ser-
vices using sagas. Either OrderService or the first step of the saga invokes an Order
method that verifies that the operation can be performed and changes the state of the
Order to a pending state. A pending state, as explained in chapter 4, is an example of
Listing 5.14
The Order class and its fields

---

## Page 207

177
Order Service business logic
a semantic lock countermeasure, which helps ensure that sagas are isolated from one
another. Eventually, once the saga has invoked the participating services, it then
updates the Order to reflect the outcome. For example, as described in chapter 4, the
Create Order Saga has multiple participant services, including Consumer Service,
Accounting Service, and Kitchen Service. OrderService first creates an Order in an
APPROVAL_PENDING state, and then later changes its state to either APPROVED or
REJECTED. The behavior of an Order can be modeled as the state machine shown in
figure 5.14.
Similarly, other Order Service operations such as revise() and cancel() first change
the Order to a pending state and use a saga to verify that the operation can be per-
formed. Then, once the saga has verified that the operation can be performed, it
changes the Order transitions to some other state that reflects the successful outcome
of the operation. If the verification of the operation fails, the Order reverts to the pre-
vious state. For example, the cancel() operation first transitions the Order to the
CANCEL_PENDING state. If the order can be cancelled, the Cancel Order Saga changes
the state of the Order to the CANCELLED state. Otherwise, if a cancel() operation is
rejected because, for example, it’s too late to cancel the order, then the Order transi-
tions back to the APPROVED state.
 Let’s now look at the how the Order aggregate implements this state machine. 
THE ORDER AGGREGATE’S METHODS
The Order class has several groups of methods, each of which corresponds to a saga.
In each group, one method is invoked at the start of the saga, and the other methods
are invoked at the end. I’ll first discuss the business logic that creates an Order. After
that we’ll look at how an Order is updated. The following listing shows the Order’s
methods that are invoked during the process of creating an Order.
APPROVAL_PENDING
CANCEL_PENDING
cancelRejected
cancelConﬁrmed
revise
rejected
authorized
cancel
reviseConﬁrmed
reviseRejected
REVISION_PENDING
APPROVED
CANCELLED
REJECTED
...
Initial state
Figure 5.14
Part of the state machine model of the Order aggregate

---

## Page 208

178
CHAPTER 5
Designing business logic in a microservice architecture
public class Order { ...
public static ResultWithDomainEvents<Order, OrderDomainEvent>
 createOrder(long consumerId, Restaurant restaurant,
List<OrderLineItem> orderLineItems) {
Order order = new Order(consumerId, restaurant.getId(), orderLineItems);
List<OrderDomainEvent> events = singletonList(new OrderCreatedEvent(
new OrderDetails(consumerId, restaurant.getId(), orderLineItems,
order.getOrderTotal()),
restaurant.getName()));
return new ResultWithDomainEvents<>(order, events);
}
public Order(OrderDetails orderDetails) {
this.orderLineItems = new OrderLineItems(orderDetails.getLineItems());
this.orderMinimum = orderDetails.getOrderMinimum();
this.state = APPROVAL_PENDING;
}
...
public List<DomainEvent> noteApproved() {
switch (state) {
case APPROVAL_PENDING:
this.state = APPROVED;
return singletonList(new OrderAuthorized());
...
default:
throw new UnsupportedStateTransitionException(state);
}
}
public List<DomainEvent> noteRejected() {
switch (state) {
case APPROVAL_PENDING:
this.state = REJECTED;
return singletonList(new OrderRejected());
...
default:
throw new UnsupportedStateTransitionException(state);
}
}
The createOrder() method is a static factory method that creates an Order and pub-
lishes an OrderCreatedEvent. The OrderCreatedEvent is enriched with the details of
the Order, including the line items, the total amount, the restaurant ID, and the
restaurant name. Chapter 7 discusses how Order History Service uses Order events,
including OrderCreatedEvent, to maintain an easily queried replica of Orders.
Listing 5.15
The methods that are invoked during order creation

---

## Page 209

179
Order Service business logic
 The initial state of the Order is APPROVAL_PENDING. When the CreateOrderSaga
completes, it will invoke either noteApproved() or noteRejected(). The note-
Approved() method is invoked when the consumer’s credit card has been successfully
authorized. The noteRejected() method is called when one of the services rejects
the order or authorization fails. As you can see, the state of the Order aggregate
determines the behavior of most of its methods. Like the Ticket aggregate, it also
emits events.
 In addition to createOrder(), the Order class defines several update methods. For
example, the Revise Order Saga revises an order by first invoking the revise() method
and then, once it’s verified that the revision can be made, it invokes the confirm-
Revised() method. The following listing shows these methods.
class Order ...
public List<OrderDomainEvent> revise(OrderRevision orderRevision) {
switch (state) {
case APPROVED:
LineItemQuantityChange change =
orderLineItems.lineItemQuantityChange(orderRevision);
if (change.newOrderTotal.isGreaterThanOrEqual(orderMinimum)) {
throw new OrderMinimumNotMetException();
}
this.state = REVISION_PENDING;
return singletonList(new OrderRevisionProposed(orderRevision,
change.currentOrderTotal, change.newOrderTotal));
default:
throw new UnsupportedStateTransitionException(state);
}
}
public List<OrderDomainEvent> confirmRevision(OrderRevision orderRevision) {
switch (state) {
case REVISION_PENDING:
LineItemQuantityChange licd =
orderLineItems.lineItemQuantityChange(orderRevision);
orderRevision
.getDeliveryInformation()
.ifPresent(newDi -> this.deliveryInformation = newDi);
if (!orderRevision.getRevisedLineItemQuantities().isEmpty()) {
orderLineItems.updateLineItems(orderRevision);
}
this.state = APPROVED;
return singletonList(new OrderRevised(orderRevision,
licd.currentOrderTotal, licd.newOrderTotal));
Listing 5.16
The Order method for revising an Order

---

## Page 210

180
CHAPTER 5
Designing business logic in a microservice architecture
default:
throw new UnsupportedStateTransitionException(state);
}
}
}
The revise() method is called to initiate the revision of an order. Among other
things, it verifies that the revised order won’t violate the order minimum and changes
the state of the order to REVISION_PENDING. Once Revise Order Saga has successfully
updated Kitchen Service and Accounting Service, it then calls confirmRevision()
to complete the revision.
 These methods are invoked by OrderService. Let’s take a look at that class. 
5.5.2
The OrderService class
The OrderService class defines methods for creating and updating Orders. It’s the
main entry point into the business logic and is invoked by various inbound adapters,
such as the REST API. Most of its methods create a saga to orchestrate the creation and
updating of Order aggregates. As a result, this service is more complicated than the
KitchenService class discussed earlier. The following listing shows an excerpt of this
class. OrderService is injected with various dependencies, including OrderRepository,
OrderDomainEventPublisher, and several saga managers. It defines several methods,
including createOrder() and reviseOrder().
@Transactional
public class OrderService {
@Autowired
private OrderRepository orderRepository;
@Autowired
private SagaManager<CreateOrderSagaState, CreateOrderSagaState>
createOrderSagaManager;
@Autowired
private SagaManager<ReviseOrderSagaState, ReviseOrderSagaData>
reviseOrderSagaManagement;
@Autowired
private OrderDomainEventPublisher orderAggregateEventPublisher;
public Order createOrder(OrderDetails orderDetails) {
Restaurant restaurant = restaurantRepository.findById(restaurantId)
.orElseThrow(() -
> new RestaurantNotFoundException(restaurantId));
Listing 5.17
The OrderService class has methods for creating and managing orders

---

## Page 211

181
Order Service business logic
List<OrderLineItem> orderLineItems =
  
makeOrderLineItems(lineItems, restaurant);
ResultWithDomainEvents<Order, OrderDomainEvent> orderAndEvents =
Order.createOrder(consumerId, restaurant, orderLineItems);
Order order = orderAndEvents.result;
orderRepository.save(order);
orderAggregateEventPublisher.publish(order, orderAndEvents.events);  
OrderDetails orderDetails =
new OrderDetails(consumerId, restaurantId, orderLineItems,
order.getOrderTotal());
CreateOrderSagaState data = new CreateOrderSagaState(order.getId(),
orderDetails);
createOrderSagaManager.create(data, Order.class, order.getId());  
return order;
}
public Order reviseOrder(Long orderId, Long expectedVersion,
OrderRevision orderRevision)
{
public Order reviseOrder(long orderId, OrderRevision orderRevision) {
Order order = orderRepository.findById(orderId)
  
.orElseThrow(() -> new OrderNotFoundException(orderId));
ReviseOrderSagaData sagaData =
new ReviseOrderSagaData(order.getConsumerId(), orderId,
null, orderRevision);
reviseOrderSagaManager.create(sagaData);   
return order;
}
}
The createOrder() method first creates and persists an Order aggregate. It then pub-
lishes the domain events emitted by the aggregate. Finally, it creates a CreateOrder-
Saga. The reviseOrder() retrieves the Order and then creates a ReviseOrderSaga.
 In many ways, the business logic for a microservices-based application is not that
different from that of a monolithic application. It’s comprised of classes such as ser-
vices, JPA-backed entities, and repositories. There are some differences, though. A
domain model is organized as a set of DDD aggregates that impose various design
constraints. Unlike in a traditional object model, references between classes in differ-
ent aggregates are in terms of primary key value rather than object references. Also, a
transaction can only create or update a single aggregate. It’s also useful for aggregates
to publish domain events when their state changes.
 Another major difference is that services often use sagas to maintain data consis-
tency across multiple services. For example, Kitchen Service merely participates in
sagas, it doesn’t initiate them. In contrast, Order Service relies heavily on sagas when
Creates the Order 
aggregate
Persists the Order 
in the database
Publishes
domain
events
Creates the Create
Order Saga
Retrieves
the Order
Creates the 
Revise Order 
Saga

---

## Page 212

182
CHAPTER 5
Designing business logic in a microservice architecture
creating and updating orders. That’s because Orders must be transactionally consis-
tent with data owned by other services. As a result, most OrderService methods create
a saga rather than update an Order directly.
 This chapter has covered how to implement business logic using a traditional
approach to persistence. That has involved integrating messaging and event publish-
ing with database transaction management. The event publishing code is intertwined
with the business logic. The next chapter looks at event sourcing, an event-centric
approach to writing business logic where event generation is integral to the business
logic rather than being bolted on. 
Summary
The procedural Transaction script pattern is often a good way to implement
simple business logic. But when implementing complex business logic you should
consider using the object-oriented Domain model pattern.
A good way to organize a service’s business logic is as a collection of DDD aggre-
gates. DDD aggregates are useful because they modularize the domain model,
eliminate the possibility of object reference between services, and ensure that
each ACID transaction is within a service.
An aggregate should publish domain events when it’s created or updated.
Domain events have a wide variety of uses. Chapter 4 discusses how they can
implement choreography-based sagas. And, in chapter 7, I talk about how to
use domain events to update replicated data. Domain event subscribers can also
notify users and other applications, and publish WebSocket messages to a user’s
browser.

---

## Page 213

183
Developing business
logic with event sourcing
Mary liked the idea, described in chapter 5, of structuring business logic as a collec-
tion of DDD aggregates that publish domain events. She could imagine the use of
those events being extremely useful in a microservice architecture. Mary planned
to use events to implement choreography-based sagas, which maintain data consis-
tency across services and are described in chapter 4. She also expected to use CQRS
views, replicas that support efficient querying that are described in chapter 7.
 She was, however, worried that the event publishing logic might be error prone.
On one hand, the event publishing logic is reasonably straightforward. Each of an
aggregate’s methods that initializes or changes the state of the aggregate returns a
list of events. The domain service then publishes those events. But on the other
This chapter covers
Using the Event sourcing pattern to develop 
business logic
Implementing an event store
Integrating sagas and event sourcing-based 
business logic
Implementing saga orchestrators using event 
sourcing

---

## Page 214

184
CHAPTER 6
Developing business logic with event sourcing
hand, the event publishing logic is bolted on to the business logic. The business logic
continues to work even when the developer forgets to publish an event. Mary was con-
cerned that this way of publishing events might be a source of bugs.
 Many years ago, Mary had learned about event sourcing, an event-centric way of writ-
ing business logic and persisting domain objects. At the time she was intrigued by its
numerous benefits, including how it preserves the complete history of the changes to
an aggregate, but it remained a curiosity. Given the importance of domain events
in microservice architecture, she now wonders whether it would be worthwhile to
explore using event sourcing in the FTGO application. After all, event sourcing elimi-
nates a source of programming errors by guaranteeing that an event will be published
whenever an aggregate is created or updated.
 I begin this chapter by describing how event sourcing works and how you can use it
to write business logic. I describe how event sourcing persists each aggregate as a
sequence of events in what is known as an event store. I discuss the benefits and draw-
backs of event sourcing and cover how to implement an event store. I describe a sim-
ple framework for writing event sourcing-based business logic. After that, I discuss
how event sourcing is a good foundation for implementing sagas. Let’s start by look-
ing at how to develop business logic with event sourcing.
6.1
Developing business logic using event sourcing
Event sourcing is a different way of structuring the business logic and persisting aggre-
gates. It persists an aggregate as a sequence of events. Each event represents a state
change of the aggregate. An application recreates the current state of an aggregate by
replaying the events.
Event sourcing has several important benefits. For example, it preserves the history of
aggregates, which is valuable for auditing and regulatory purposes. And it reliably
publishes domain events, which is particularly useful in a microservice architecture.
Event sourcing also has drawbacks. It involves a learning curve, because it’s a different
way to write your business logic. Also, querying the event store is often difficult, which
requires you to use the CQRS pattern, described in chapter 7.
 I begin this section by describing the limitations of traditional persistence. I then
describe event sourcing in detail and talk about how it overcomes those limitations.
After that, I show how to implement the Order aggregate using event sourcing. Finally,
I describe the benefits and drawbacks of event sourcing.
 Let’s first look at the limitations of the traditional approach to persistence.
Pattern: Event sourcing
Persist an aggregate as a sequence of domain events that represent state changes.
See http://microservices.io/patterns/data/event-sourcing.html.

---

## Page 215

185
Developing business logic using event sourcing
6.1.1
The trouble with traditional persistence
The traditional approach to persistence maps classes to database tables, fields of those
classes to table columns, and instances of those classes to rows in those tables. For
example, figure 6.1 shows how the Order aggregate, described in chapter 5, is mapped
to the ORDER table. Its OrderLineItems are mapped to the ORDER_LINE_ITEM table.
The application persists an order instance as rows in the ORDER and ORDER_LINE_ITEM
tables. It might do that using an ORM framework such as JPA or a lower-level frame-
work such as MyBATIS.
 This approach clearly works well because most enterprise applications store data
this way. But it has several drawbacks and limitations:
Object-Relational impedance mismatch.
Lack of aggregate history.
Implementing audit logging is tedious and error prone.
Event publishing is bolted on to the business logic.
Let’s look at each of these problems, starting with the Object-Relational impedance
mismatch problem.
OBJECT-RELATIONAL IMPEDANCE MISMATCH
One age-old problem is the so-called Object-Relational impedance mismatch problem.
There’s a fundamental conceptual mismatch between the tabular relational schema
and the graph structure of a rich domain model with its complex relationships.
Some aspects of this problem are reflected in polarized debates over the suitability of
Object/Relational mapping (ORM) frameworks. For example, Ted Neward has said
that “Object-Relational mapping is the Vietnam of Computer Science” (http://blogs
.tedneward.com/post/the-vietnam-of-computer-science/). To be fair, I’ve used
«class»
Order
ID
1234
CUSTOMER_ID
customer-abc
ORDER_TOTAL
1234.56
...
...
«class»
OrderLineItem
ID
567
ORDER_ID
1234
ORDER table
ORDER_LINE_ITEM table
QUANTITY
2
...
...
Figure 6.1
The traditional approach to persistence maps classes to tables and objects to rows in 
those tables.

---

## Page 216

186
CHAPTER 6
Developing business logic with event sourcing
Hibernate successfully to develop applications where the database schema has been
derived from the object model. But the problems are deeper than the limitations of
any particular ORM framework. 
LACK OF AGGREGATE HISTORY
Another limitation of traditional persistence is that it only stores the current state of
an aggregate. Once an aggregate has been updated, its previous state is lost. If an
application must preserve the history of an aggregate, perhaps for regulatory pur-
poses, then developers must implement this mechanism themselves. It is time con-
suming to implement an aggregate history mechanism and involves duplicating code
that must be synchronized with the business logic. 
IMPLEMENTING AUDIT LOGGING IS TEDIOUS AND ERROR PRONE
Another issue is audit logging. Many applications must maintain an audit log that
tracks which users have changed an aggregate. Some applications require auditing for
security or regulatory purposes. In other applications, the history of user actions is an
important feature. For example, issue trackers and task-management applications
such as Asana and JIRA display the history of changes to tasks and issues. The chal-
lenge of implementing auditing is that besides being a time-consuming chore, the
auditing logging code and the business logic can diverge, resulting in bugs. 
EVENT PUBLISHING IS BOLTED ON TO THE BUSINESS LOGIC
Another limitation of traditional persistence is that it usually doesn’t support publishing
domain events. Domain events, discussed in chapter 5, are events that are published by
an aggregate when its state changes. They’re a useful mechanism for synchronizing data
and sending notifications in microservice architecture. Some ORM frameworks, such
as Hibernate, can invoke application-provided callbacks when data objects change.
But there’s no support for automatically publishing messages as part of the transac-
tion that updates the data. Consequently, as with history and auditing, developers
must bolt on event-generation logic, which risks not being synchronized with the busi-
ness logic. Fortunately, there’s a solution to these issues: event sourcing. 
6.1.2
Overview of event sourcing
Event sourcing is an event-centric technique for implementing business logic and per-
sisting aggregates. An aggregate is stored in the database as a series of events. Each
event represents a state change of the aggregate. An aggregate’s business logic is struc-
tured around the requirement to produce and consume these events. Let’s see how
that works.
EVENT SOURCING PERSISTS AGGREGATES USING EVENTS
Earlier, in section 6.1.1, I discussed how traditional persistence maps aggregates to
tables, their fields to columns, and their instances to rows. Event sourcing is a very
different approach to persisting aggregates that builds on the concept of domain
events. It persists each aggregate as a sequence of events in the database, known as
an event store.

---

## Page 217

187
Developing business logic using event sourcing
 Consider, for example, the Order aggregate. As figure 6.2 shows, rather than store
each Order as a row in an ORDER table, event sourcing persists each Order aggregate as
one or more rows in an EVENTS table. Each row is a domain event, such as Order
Created, Order Approved, Order Shipped, and so on.
When an application creates or updates an aggregate, it inserts the events emitted by
the aggregate into the EVENTS table. An application loads an aggregate from the event
store by retrieving its events and replaying them. Specifically, loading an aggregate
consists of the following three steps:
1
Load the events for the aggregate.
2
Create an aggregate instance by using its default constructor.
3
Iterate through the events, calling apply().
For example, the Eventuate Client framework, covered later in section 6.2.2, uses code
similar to the following to reconstruct an aggregate:
Class aggregateClass = ...;
Aggregate aggregate = aggregateClass.newInstance();
for (Event event : events) {
aggregate = aggregate.applyEvent(event);
}
// use aggregate...
It creates an instance of the class and iterates through the events, calling the aggre-
gate’s applyEvent() method. If you’re familiar with functional programming, you
may recognize this as a fold or reduce operation.
event_id
102
103
104
105
...
EVENTS table
event_type
Order
Created
Order
Approved
Order
Shipped
Order
Delivered
...
entity_type
Order
Order
Order
Order
...
entity_id
101
101
101
101
...
event_data
{...}
{...}
{...}
{...}
...
Unique event ID
The type of the event
Identiﬁes the aggregate
The serialized event,
such as JSON
Figure 6.2
Event sourcing persists each aggregate as a sequence of events. A RDBMS-based 
application can, for example, store the events in an EVENTS table.

---

## Page 218

188
CHAPTER 6
Developing business logic with event sourcing
 It may be strange and unfamiliar to reconstruct the in-memory state of an aggre-
gate by loading the events and replaying events. But in some ways, it’s not all that dif-
ferent from how an ORM framework such as JPA or Hibernate loads an entity. An
ORM framework loads an object by executing one or more SELECT statements to
retrieve the current persisted state, instantiating objects using their default construc-
tors. It uses reflection to initialize those objects. What’s different about event sourcing
is that the reconstruction of the in-memory state is accomplished using events.
 Let’s now look at the requirements event sourcing places on domain events. 
EVENTS REPRESENT STATE CHANGES
Chapter 5 defines domain events as a mechanism for notifying subscribers of changes
to aggregates. Events can either contain minimal data, such as just the aggregate ID,
or can be enriched to contain data that’s useful to a typical consumer. For example,
the Order Service can publish an OrderCreated event when an order is created. An
OrderCreated event may only contain the orderId. Alternatively, the event could con-
tain the complete order so consumers of that event don’t have to fetch the data from
the Order Service. Whether events are published and what those events contain are
driven by the needs of the consumers. With event sourcing, though, it’s primarily the
aggregate that determines the events and their structure.
 Events aren’t optional when using event sourcing. Every state change of an aggre-
gate, including its creation, is represented by a domain event. Whenever the aggregate’s
state changes, it must emit an event. For example, an Order aggregate must emit an
OrderCreated event when it’s created, and an Order* event whenever it is updated.
This is a much more stringent requirement than before, when an aggregate only emit-
ted events that were of interest to consumers.
 What’s more, an event must contain the data that the aggregate needs to perform
the state transition. The state of an aggregate consists of the values of the fields of the
objects that comprise the aggregate. A state change might be as simple as changing
the value of the field of an object, such as Order.state. Alternatively, a state change
can involve adding or removing objects, such as revising an Order’s line items.
 Suppose, as figure 6.3 shows, that the current state of the aggregate is S and the
new state is S'. An event E that represents the state change must contain the data such
that when an Order is in state S, calling order.apply(E) will update the Order to state
S'. In the next section you’ll see that apply() is a method that performs the state
change represented by an event.
 Some events, such as the Order Shipped event, contain little or no data and just
represent the state transition. The apply() method handles an Order Shipped event
by changing the Order’s status field to SHIPPED. Other events, however, contain a lot
of data. An OrderCreated event, for example, must contain all the data needed by the
apply() method to initialize an Order, including its line items, payment information,
delivery information, and so on. Because events are used to persist an aggregate, you
no longer have the option of using a minimal OrderCreated event that contains the
orderId.

---

## Page 219

189
Developing business logic using event sourcing
AGGREGATE METHODS ARE ALL ABOUT EVENTS
The business logic handles a request to update an aggregate by calling a command
method on the aggregate root. In a traditional application, a command method typi-
cally validates its arguments and then updates one or more of the aggregate’s fields.
Command methods in an event sourcing-based application work because they must
generate events. As figure 6.4 shows, the outcome of invoking an aggregate’s com-
mand method is a sequence of events that represent the state changes that must be
made. These events are persisted in the database and applied to the aggregate to
update its state.
The requirement to generate events and apply them requires a restructuring—albeit
mechanical—of the business logic. Event sourcing refactors a command method into
two or more methods. The first method takes a command object parameter, which
represents the request, and determines what state changes need to be performed. It
validates its arguments, and without changing the state of the aggregate, returns a list
of events representing the state changes. This method typically throws an exception if
the command cannot be performed.
Objects and ﬁeld values
Updated objects
and ﬁeld values
«aggregate»
Order
S
Event
apply()
«aggregate»
Order
S’
Figure 6.3
Applying event E 
when the Order is in state S 
must change the Order state to 
S'. The event must contain the 
data necessary to perform the 
state change.
«aggregate»
Order
S
Event
apply()
Process(command)
«aggregate»
Order
S’
«aggregate»
Order
S
Event
Figure 6.4
Processing a command 
generates events without changing 
the state of the aggregate. An 
aggregate is updated by applying 
an event.

---

## Page 220

190
CHAPTER 6
Developing business logic with event sourcing
 The other methods each take a particular event type as a parameter and update
the aggregate. There’s one of these methods for each event. It’s important to note
that these methods can’t fail, because an event represents a state change that has hap-
pened. Each method updates the aggregate based on the event.
 The Eventuate Client framework, an event-sourcing framework described in more
detail in section 6.2.2, names these methods process() and apply(). A process()
method takes a command object, which contains the arguments of the update
request, as a parameter and returns a list of events. An apply() method takes an event
as a parameter and returns void. An aggregate will define multiple overloaded ver-
sions of these methods: one process() method for each command class and one
apply() method for each event type emitted by the aggregate. Figure 6.5 shows an
example.
Returns events without updating the Order
Applies events to update the Order
public class Order {
public List<Event> process(ReviseOrder command) {
OrderRevision orderRevision = command.getOrderRevision();
switch (state) {
case AUTHORIZED:
LineItemQuantityChange change =
orderLineItems.lineItemQuantityChange(orderRevision);
if (change.newOrderTotal.isGreaterThanOrEqual(orderMinimum)) {
throw new OrderMinimumNotMetException();
}
return singletonList(
new OrderRevisionProposed(
orderRevision, change.currentOrderTotal,
change.newOrderTotal));
default:
throw new UnsupportedStateTransitionException(state);
}
}
public class Order {
public void apply(OrderRevisionProposed event) {
this.state = REVISION_PENDING;
}
public class Order {
public List<DomainEvent> revise(OrderRevision orderRevision) {
switch (state) {
case AUTHORIZED:
LineItemQuantityChange change =
orderLineItems.lineItemQuantityChange(orderRevision);
if (change.newOrderTotal.isGreaterThanOrEqual(orderMinimum)) {
throw new OrderMinimumNotMetException();
}
this.state = REVISION_PENDING;
return …;
default:
throw new UnsupportedStateTransitionException(state);
}
}
Figure 6.5
Event sourcing splits a method that updates an aggregate into a process() method, which takes 
a command and returns events, and one or more apply() methods, which take an event and update the 
aggregate.

---

## Page 221

191
Developing business logic using event sourcing
In this example, the reviseOrder() method is replaced by a process() method and
an apply() method. The process() method takes a ReviseOrder command as a
parameter. This command class is defined by applying Introduce Parameter Object refactor-
ing (https://refactoring.com/catalog/introduceParameterObject.html) to the revise-
Order() method. The process() method either returns an OrderRevisionProposed
event, or throws an exception if it’s too late to revise the Order or if the proposed revi-
sion doesn’t meet the order minimum. The apply() method for the OrderRevision-
Proposed event changes the state of the Order to REVISION_PENDING.
 An aggregate is created using the following steps:
1
Instantiate aggregate root using its default constructor.
2
Invoke process() to generate the new events.
3
Update the aggregate by iterating through the new events, calling its apply().
4
Save the new events in the event store.
An aggregate is updated using the following steps:
1
Load aggregate’s events from the event store.
2
Instantiate the aggregate root using its default constructor.
3
Iterate through the loaded events, calling apply() on the aggregate root.
4
Invoke its process() method to generate new events.
5
Update the aggregate by iterating through the new events, calling apply().
6
Save the new events in the event store.
To see this in action, let’s now look at the event sourcing version of the Order aggregate. 
EVENT SOURCING-BASED ORDER AGGREGATE
Listing 6.1 shows the Order aggregate’s fields and the methods responsible for creat-
ing it. The event sourcing version of the Order aggregate has some similarities to the
JPA-based version shown in chapter 5. Its fields are almost identical, and it emits simi-
lar events. What’s different is that its business logic is implemented in terms of pro-
cessing commands that emit events and applying those events, which updates its state.
Each method that creates or updates the JPA-based aggregate, such as createOrder()
and reviseOrder(), is replaced in the event sourcing version by process() and
apply() methods.
public class Order {
private OrderState state;
private Long consumerId;
private Long restaurantId;
private OrderLineItems orderLineItems;
private DeliveryInformation deliveryInformation;
private PaymentInformation paymentInformation;
private Money orderMinimum;
Listing 6.1
The Order aggregate’s fields and its methods that initialize an instance

---

## Page 222

192
CHAPTER 6
Developing business logic with event sourcing
public Order() {
}
public List<Event> process(CreateOrderCommand command) {   
... validate command ...
return events(new OrderCreatedEvent(command.getOrderDetails()));
}
public void apply(OrderCreatedEvent event) {
  
OrderDetails orderDetails = event.getOrderDetails();
this.orderLineItems = new OrderLineItems(orderDetails.getLineItems());
this.orderMinimum = orderDetails.getOrderMinimum();
this.state = APPROVAL_PENDING;
}
This class’s fields are similar to those of the JPA-based Order. The only difference is
that the aggregate’s id isn’t stored in the aggregate. The Order’s methods are quite
different. The createOrder() factory method has been replaced by process() and
apply() methods. The process() method takes a CreateOrder command and emits
an OrderCreated event. The apply() method takes the OrderCreated and initializes
the fields of the Order.
 We’ll now look at the slightly more complex business logic for revising an order.
Previously this business logic consisted of three methods: reviseOrder(), confirm-
Revision(), and rejectRevision(). The event sourcing version replaces these three
methods with three process() methods and some apply() methods. The following list-
ing shows the event sourcing version of reviseOrder() and confirmRevision().
public class Order {
public List<Event> process(ReviseOrder command) {
  
OrderRevision orderRevision = command.getOrderRevision();
switch (state) {
case APPROVED:
LineItemQuantityChange change =
orderLineItems.lineItemQuantityChange(orderRevision);
if (change.newOrderTotal.isGreaterThanOrEqual(orderMinimum)) {
throw new OrderMinimumNotMetException();
}
return singletonList(new OrderRevisionProposed(orderRevision,
change.currentOrderTotal, change.newOrderTotal));
default:
throw new UnsupportedStateTransitionException(state);
}
}
public void apply(OrderRevisionProposed event) {
  
this.state = REVISION_PENDING;
}
Listing 6.2
The process() and apply() methods that revise an Order aggregate
Validates the command and
returns an OrderCreatedEvent
Apply the OrderCreatedEvent by
initializing the fields of the Order.
Verify that the Order 
can be revised and 
that the revised 
order meets the 
order minimum.
Change the state of the Order 
to REVISION_PENDING.

---

## Page 223

193
Developing business logic using event sourcing
public List<Event> process(ConfirmReviseOrder command) {
  
OrderRevision orderRevision = command.getOrderRevision();
switch (state) {
case REVISION_PENDING:
LineItemQuantityChange licd =
orderLineItems.lineItemQuantityChange(orderRevision);
return singletonList(new OrderRevised(orderRevision,
licd.currentOrderTotal, licd.newOrderTotal));
default:
throw new UnsupportedStateTransitionException(state);
}
}
public void apply(OrderRevised event) {
OrderRevision orderRevision = event.getOrderRevision();
if (!orderRevision.getRevisedLineItemQuantities().isEmpty()) {
orderLineItems.updateLineItems(orderRevision);
}
this.state = APPROVED;
}
As you can see, each method has been replaced by a process() method and one or
more apply() methods. The reviseOrder() method has been replaced by process
(ReviseOrder) and apply(OrderRevisionProposed). Similarly, confirmRevision()
has been replaced by process(ConfirmReviseOrder) and apply(OrderRevised). 
6.1.3
Handling concurrent updates using optimistic locking
It’s not uncommon for two or more requests to simultaneously update the same
aggregate. An application that uses traditional persistence often uses optimistic lock-
ing to prevent one transaction from overwriting another’s changes. Optimistic locking
typically uses a version column to detect whether an aggregate has changed since it
was read. The application maps the aggregate root to a table that has a VERSION col-
umn, which is incremented whenever the aggregate is updated. The application
updates the aggregate using an UPDATE statement like this:
UPDATE AGGREGATE_ROOT_TABLE
SET VERSION = VERSION + 1 ...
WHERE VERSION = <original version>
This UPDATE statement will only succeed if the version is unchanged from when the
application read the aggregate. If two transactions read the same aggregate, the first
one that updates the aggregate will succeed. The second one will fail because the ver-
sion number has changed, so it won’t accidentally overwrite the first transaction’s
changes.
 An event store can also use optimistic locking to handle concurrent updates. Each
aggregate instance has a version that’s read along with the events. When the applica-
tion inserts events, the event store verifies that the version is unchanged. A simple
Verify that the 
revision can be 
confirmed and 
return an Order-
Revised event.
Revise the 
Order.

---

## Page 224

194
CHAPTER 6
Developing business logic with event sourcing
approach is to use the number of events as the version number. Alternatively, as you’ll
see below in section 6.2, an event store could maintain an explicit version number. 
6.1.4
Event sourcing and publishing events
Strictly speaking, event sourcing persists aggregates as events and reconstructs the cur-
rent state of an aggregate from those events. You can also use event sourcing as a reli-
able event publishing mechanism. Saving an event in the event store is an inherently
atomic operation. We need to implement a mechanism to deliver all persisted events
to interested consumers.
 Chapter 3 describes a couple of different mechanisms—polling and transaction log
tailing—for publishing messages that are inserted into the database as part of a transac-
tion. An event sourcing-based application can publish events using one of these mecha-
nisms. The main difference is that it permanently stores events in an EVENTS table rather
than temporarily saving events in an OUTBOX table and then deleting them. Let’s take a
look at each approach, starting with polling.
USING POLLING TO PUBLISH EVENTS
If events are stored in the EVENTS table shown in figure 6.6, an event publisher can
poll the table for new events by executing a SELECT statement and publish the events
to a message broker. The challenge is determining which events are new. For exam-
ple, imagine that eventIds are monotonically increasing. The superficially appealing
approach is for the event publisher to record the last eventId that it has processed. It
would then retrieve new events using a query like this: SELECT * FROM EVENTS where
event_id > ? ORDER BY event_id ASC.
 The problem with this approach is that transactions can commit in an order that’s
different from the order in which they generate events. As a result, the event pub-
lisher can accidentally skip over an event. Figure 6.6 shows such as a scenario.
Transaction A
Transaction B
COMMIT
BEGIN
BEGIN
COMMIT
INSERT event with
EVENT_ID = 1020
SELECT * FROM EVENTS
WHERE EVENT_ID > ....
SELECT * FROM EVENTS
WHERE EVENT_ID > 1020...
INSERT event with
EVENT_ID = 1010
Retrieves event 1020
Commits last
Skips event 1010 because
1010 <= event 1020
Figure 6.6
A scenario where an event is skipped because its transaction A commits after 
transaction B. Polling sees eventId=1020 and then later skips eventId=1010.

---

## Page 225

195
Developing business logic using event sourcing
In this scenario, Transaction A inserts an event with an EVENT_ID of 1010. Next, trans-
action B inserts an event with an EVENT_ID of 1020 and then commits. If the event
publisher were now to query the EVENTS table, it would find event 1020. Later on, after
transaction A committed and event 1010 became visible, the event publisher would
ignore it.
 One solution to this problem is to add an extra column to the EVENTS table that
tracks whether an event has been published. The event publisher would then use the
following process:
1
Find unpublished events by executing this SELECT statement: SELECT * FROM
EVENTS where PUBLISHED = 0 ORDER BY event_id ASC.
2
Publish events to the message broker.
3
Mark the events as having been published: UPDATE EVENTS SET PUBLISHED = 1
WHERE EVENT_ID in.
This approach prevents the event publisher from skipping events. 
USING TRANSACTION LOG TAILING TO RELIABLY PUBLISH EVENTS
More sophisticated event stores use transaction log tailing, which, as chapter 3 describes,
guarantees that events will be published and is also more performant and scalable.
For example, Eventuate Local, an open source event store, uses this approach. It reads
events inserted into an EVENTS table from the database transaction log and pub-
lishes them to the message broker. Section 6.2 discusses how Eventuate Local works
in more detail. 
6.1.5
Using snapshots to improve performance
An Order aggregate has relatively few state transitions, so it only has a small number of
events. It’s efficient to query the event store for those events and reconstruct an Order
aggregate. Long-lived aggregates, though, can have a large number of events. For
example, an Account aggregate potentially has a large number of events. Over time, it
would become increasingly inefficient to load and fold those events.
 A common solution is to periodically persist a snapshot of the aggregate’s state.
Figure 6.7 shows an example of using a snapshot. The application restores the state of
The application only needs
to retrieve the snapshot and
events that occur after it.
Event 1
Event 2
Event ...
Event N
Event
+1
N
Snapshot
version N
Event
+2
N
Figure 6.7
Using a snapshot improves performance by eliminating the need to load all 
events. An application only needs to load the snapshot and the events that occur after it.

---

## Page 226

196
CHAPTER 6
Developing business logic with event sourcing
an aggregate by loading the most recent snapshot and only those events that have
occurred since the snapshot was created.
 In this example, the snapshot version is N. The application only needs to load the
snapshot and the two events that follow it in order to restore the state of the aggre-
gate. The previous N events are not loaded from the event store.
 When restoring the state of an aggregate from a snapshot, an application first creates
an aggregate instance from the snapshot and then iterates through the events, applying
them. For example, the Eventuate Client framework, described in section 6.2.2, uses
code similar to the following to reconstruct an aggregate:
Class aggregateClass = ...;
Snapshot snapshot = ...;
Aggregate aggregate = recreateFromSnapshot(aggregateClass, snapshot);
for (Event event : events) {
aggregate = aggregate.applyEvent(event);
}
// use aggregate...
When using snapshots, the aggregate instance is recreated from the snapshot instead
of being created using its default constructor. If an aggregate has a simple, easily seri-
alizable structure, the snapshot can be, for example, its JSON serialization. More com-
plex aggregates can be snapshotted using the Memento pattern (https://en.wikipedia
.org/wiki/Memento_pattern).
 The Customer aggregate in the online store example has a very simple structure:
the customer’s information, their credit limit, and their credit reservations. A snap-
shot of a Customer is the JSON serialization of its state. Figure 6.8 shows how to recre-
ate a Customer from a snapshot corresponding to the state of a Customer as of event
#103. The Customer Service needs to load the snapshot and the events that have
occurred after event #103.
The Customer Service recreates the Customer by deserializing the snapshot’s JSON
and then loading and applying events #104 through #106. 
event_id
...
103
104
105
106
EVENTS
event_type
...
...
Credit
Reserved
Address
Changed
Credit
Reserved
entity_type
...
Customer
Customer
Customer
Customer
entity_id
...
101
101
101
101
event_data
...
{...}
{...}
{...}
{...}
event_id
...
103
...
...
SNAPSHOTS
entity_type
...
Customer
...
...
snapshot_data
...
{name: “...” , ...}
...
...
event_id
...
101
...
...
Figure 6.8
The Customer Service recreates the Customer by deserializing the snapshot’s JSON and then 
loading and applying events #104 through #106.

---

## Page 227

197
Developing business logic using event sourcing
6.1.6
Idempotent message processing
Services often consume messages from other applications or other services. A service
might, for example, consume domain events published by aggregates or command
messages sent by a saga orchestrator. As described in chapter 3, an important issue
when developing a message consumer is ensuring that it’s idempotent, because a mes-
sage broker might deliver the same message multiple times.
 A message consumer is idempotent if it can safely be invoked with the same mes-
sage multiple times. The Eventuate Tram framework, for example, implements idem-
potent message handling by detecting and discarding duplicate messages. It records
the ids of processed messages in a PROCESSED_MESSAGES table as part of the local
ACID transaction used by the business logic to create or update aggregates. If the ID
of a message is in the PROCESSED_MESSAGES table, it’s a duplicate and can be dis-
carded. Event sourcing-based business logic must implement an equivalent mecha-
nism. How this is done depends on whether the event store uses an RDBMS or a
NoSQL database.
IDEMPOTENT MESSAGE PROCESSING WITH AN RDBMS-BASED EVENT STORE
If an application uses an RDBMS-based event store, it can use an identical approach to
detect and discard duplicates messages. It inserts the message ID into the PROCESSED
_MESSAGES table as part of the transaction that inserts events into the EVENTS table. 
IDEMPOTENT MESSAGE PROCESSING WHEN USING A NOSQL-BASED EVENT STORE
A NoSQL-based event store, which has a limited transaction model, must use a different
mechanism to implement idempotent message handling. A message consumer must
somehow atomically persist events and record the message ID. Fortunately, there’s a
simple solution. A message consumer stores the message’s ID in the events that are
generated while processing it. It detects duplicates by verifying that none of an aggre-
gate’s events contains the message ID.
 One challenge with using this approach is that processing a message might not
generate any events. The lack of events means there’s no record of a message having
been processed. A subsequent redelivery and reprocessing of the same message might
result in incorrect behavior. For example, consider the following scenario:
1
Message A is processed but doesn’t update an aggregate.
2
Message B is processed, and the message consumer updates the aggregate.
3
Message A is redelivered, and because there’s no record of it having been pro-
cessed, the message consumer updates the aggregate.
4
Message B is processed again….
In this scenario, the redelivery of events results in a different and possibly erroneous
outcome.
 One way to avoid this problem is to always publish an event. If an aggregate doesn’t
emit an event, an application saves a pseudo event solely to record the message ID.
Event consumers must ignore these pseudo events.

---

## Page 228

198
CHAPTER 6
Developing business logic with event sourcing
6.1.7
Evolving domain events
Event sourcing, at least conceptually, stores events forever—which is a double-edged
sword. On one hand, it provides the application with an audit log of changes that’s
guaranteed to be accurate. It also enables an application to reconstruct the historical
state of an aggregate. On the other hand, it creates a challenge, because the structure
of events often changes over time.
 An application must potentially deal with multiple versions of events. For example,
a service that loads an Order aggregate could potentially need to fold multiple ver-
sions of events. Similarly, an event subscriber might potentially see multiple versions.
 Let’s first look at the different ways that events can change, and then I’ll describe a
commonly used approach for handling changes.
EVENT SCHEMA EVOLUTION
Conceptually, an event sourcing application has a schema that’s organized into
three levels:
Consists of one or more aggregates
Defines the events that each aggregate emits
Defines the structure of the events
Table 6.1 shows the different types of changes that can occur at each level.
These changes occur naturally as a service’s domain model evolves over time—for
example, when a service’s requirements change or as its developers gain deeper insight
into a domain and improve the domain model. At the schema level, developers add,
remove, and rename aggregate classes. At the aggregate level, the types of events
Table 6.1
The different ways that an application’s events can evolve
Level
Change
Backward compatible
Schema
Define a new aggregate type
Yes
Remove aggregate
Remove an existing aggregate
No
Rename aggregate
Change the name of an aggregate type
No
Aggregate
Add a new event type
Yes
Remove event
Remove an event type
No
Rename event
Change the name of an event type
No
Event
Add a new field
Yes
Delete field
Delete a field
No
Rename field
Rename a field
No
Change type of field
Change the type of a field
No

---

## Page 229

199
Developing business logic using event sourcing
emitted by a particular aggregate can change. Developers can change the structure of
an event type by adding, removing, and changing the name or type of a field.
 Fortunately, many of these types of changes are backward-compatible changes. For
example, adding a field to an event is unlikely to impact consumers. A consumer
ignores unknown fields. Other changes, though, aren’t backward compatible. For
example, changing the name of an event or the name of a field requires consumers of
that event type to be changed. 
MANAGING SCHEMA CHANGES THROUGH UPCASTING
In the SQL database world, changes to a database schema are commonly handled
using schema migrations. Each schema change is represented by a migration, a SQL
script that changes the schema and migrates the data to a new schema. The schema
migrations are stored in a version control system and applied to a database using a
tool such as Flyway.
 An event sourcing application can use a similar approach to handle non-backward-
compatible changes. But instead of migrating events to the new schema version in
situ, event sourcing frameworks transform events when they’re loaded from the event
store. A component commonly called an upcaster updates individual events from an
old version to a newer version. As a result, the application code only ever deals with
the current event schema.
 Now that we’ve looked at how event sourcing works, let’s consider its benefits and
drawbacks. 
6.1.8
Benefits of event sourcing
Event sourcing has both benefits and drawbacks. The benefits include the following:
Reliably publishes domain events
Preserves the history of aggregates
Mostly avoids the O/R impedance mismatch problem
Provides developers with a time machine
Let’s examine each benefit in more detail.
RELIABLY PUBLISHES DOMAIN EVENTS
A major benefit of event sourcing is that it reliably publishes events whenever the state
of an aggregate changes. That’s a good foundation for an event-driven microservice
architecture. Also, because each event can store the identity of the user who made the
change, event sourcing provides an audit log that’s guaranteed to be accurate. The
stream of events can be used for a variety of other purposes, including notifying users,
application integration, analytics, and monitoring. 
PRESERVES THE HISTORY OF AGGREGATES
Another benefit of event sourcing is that it stores the entire history of each aggregate.
You can easily implement temporal queries that retrieve the past state of an aggregate.
To determine the state of an aggregate at a given point in time, you fold the events

---

## Page 230

200
CHAPTER 6
Developing business logic with event sourcing
that occurred up until that point. It’s straightforward, for example, to calculate the
available credit of a customer at some point in the past. 
MOSTLY AVOIDS THE O/R IMPEDANCE MISMATCH PROBLEM
Event sourcing persists events rather than aggregating them. Events typically have a
simple, easily serializable structure. As mentioned earlier, a service can snapshot a
complex aggregate by serializing a memento of its state, which adds a level of indirec-
tion between an aggregate and its serialized representation. 
PROVIDES DEVELOPERS WITH A TIME MACHINE
Event sourcing stores a history of everything that’s happened in the lifetime of an
application. Imagine that the FTGO developers need to implement a new require-
ment to customers who added an item to their shopping cart and then removed it. A
traditional application wouldn’t preserve this information, so could only market to
customers who add and remove items after the feature is implemented. In contrast, an
event sourcing-based application can immediately market to customers who have done
this in the past. It’s as if event sourcing provides developers with a time machine for
traveling to the past and implementing unanticipated requirements. 
6.1.9
Drawbacks of event sourcing
Event sourcing isn’t a silver bullet. It has the following drawbacks:
It has a different programming model that has a learning curve.
It has the complexity of a messaging-based application.
Evolving events can be tricky.
Deleting data is tricky.
Querying the event store is challenging.
Let’s look at each drawback.
DIFFERENT PROGRAMMING MODEL THAT HAS A LEARNING CURVE
It’s a different and unfamiliar programming model, and that means a learning curve.
In order for an existing application to use event sourcing, you must rewrite its busi-
ness logic. Fortunately, that’s a fairly mechanical transformation that you can do when
you migrate your application to microservices. 
COMPLEXITY OF A MESSAGING-BASED APPLICATION
Another drawback of event sourcing is that message brokers usually guarantee at-least-
once delivery. Event handlers that aren’t idempotent must detect and discard dupli-
cate events. The event sourcing framework can help by assigning each event a mono-
tonically increasing ID. An event handler can then detect duplicate events by tracking
the highest-seen event ID. This even happens automatically when event handlers
update aggregates.

---
