# 4. Building.Microservices

> Extracted from: `4. Building.Microservices.pdf` (pages 95-140)
> Total pages in PDF: 280

---

## Page 95

reach right inside their underlying data stores, leading to all the same coupling issues
we discussed earlier.
On Your Own Terms
COTS and SAAS products absolutely have their place, and it isn’t feasible (or sensi‐
ble) for most of us to build everything from scratch. So how do we resolve these chal‐
lenges? The key is to move things back on to your own terms.
The core idea here is to do any customizations on a platform you control, and to limit
the number of different consumers of the tool itself. To explore this idea in detail, let’s
look at a couple of examples.
Example: CMS as a service
In my experience, the CMS is one of the most commonly used product that needs to
be customized or integrated with. The reason for this is that unless you want a basic
static site, the average enterprise organization wants to enrich the functionality of its
website with dynamic content like customer records or the latest product offerings.
The source of this dynamic content is typically other services inside the organization,
which you may have actually built yourself.
The temptation—and often the selling point of the CMS—is that you can customize
the CMS to pull in all this special content and display it to the outside world. How‐
ever, the development environment for the average CMS is terrible.
Let’s look at what the average CMS specializes in, and what we probably bought it for:
content creation and content management. Most CMSes are pretty bad even at doing
page layout, typically providing drag-and-drop tools that don’t cut the mustard. And
even then, you end up needing to have someone who understands HTML and CSS to
fine-tune the CMS templates. They tend to be terrible platforms on which to build
custom code.
The answer? Front the CMS with your own service that provides the website to the
outside world, as shown in Figure 4-11. Treat the CMS as a service whose role is to
allow for the creation and retrieval of content. In your own service, you write the
code and integrate with services how you want. You have control over scaling the
website (many commercial CMSes provide their own proprietary add-ons to handle
load), and you can pick the templating system that makes sense.
Most CMSes also provide APIs to allow for content creation, so you also have the
ability to front that with your own service façade. For some situations, we’ve even
used such a façade to abstract out the APIs for retrieving content.
Integrating with Third-Party Software 
| 
75

---

## Page 96

Figure 4-11. Hiding a CMS using your own service
We’ve used this pattern multiple times across ThoughtWorks in the last few years, and
I’ve done this more than once myself. One notable example was a client that was
looking to push out a new website for its products. Initially, it wanted to build the
entire solution on the CMS, but it had yet to pick one. We instead suggested this
approach, and started development of the fronting website. While waiting for the
CMS tool to be selected, we faked it by having a web service that just surfaced static
content. We ended up going live with the site well before the CMS was selected by
using our fake content service in production to surface content to the live site. Later
on, we were able to just drop in the eventually selected tool without any change to the
fronting application.
Using this approach, we keep the scope of what the CMS does down to a minimum
and move customizations onto our own technology stack.
Example: The multirole CRM system
The CRM—or Customer Relationship Management—tool is an often-encountered
beast that can instill fear in the heart of even the hardiest architect. This sector, as
typified by vendors like Salesforce or SAP, is rife with examples of tools that try to do
everything for you. This can lead to the tool itself becoming a single point of failure,
and a tangled knot of dependencies. Many implementations of CRM tools I have seen
are among the best examples of adhesive (as opposed to cohesive) services.
The scope of such a tool typically starts small, but over time it becomes an increas‐
ingly important part of how your organization works. The problem is that the direc‐
tion and choices made around this now-vital system are often made by the tool
vendor itself, not by you.
I was involved recently in an exercise to try to wrest some control back. The organi‐
zation I was working with realized that although it was using the CRM tool for a lot
76 
| 
Chapter 4: Integration

---

## Page 97

of things, it wasn’t getting the value of the increasing costs associated with the plat‐
form. At the same time, multiple internal systems were using the less-than-ideal CRM
APIs for integration. We wanted to move the system architecture toward a place
where we had services that modeled our businesses domain, and also lay the ground‐
work for a potential migration.
The first thing we did was identify the core concepts to our domain that the CRM
system currently owned. One of these was the concept of a project—that is, something
to which a member of staff could be assigned. Multiple other systems needed project
information. What we did was instead create a project service. This service exposed
projects as RESTful resources, and the external systems could move their integration
points over to the new, easier-to-work-with service. Internally, the project service was
just a façade, hiding the detail of the underlying integration. You can see this in
Figure 4-12.
Figure 4-12. Using façade services to mask the underlying CRM
The work, which at the time of this writing was still under way, was to identify other
domain concepts that the CRM was handling, and create more façades for them.
When the time comes for migration away from the underlying CRM, we could then
look at each façade in turn to decide if an internal software solution or something off
the shelf could fit the bill.
The Strangler Pattern
When it comes to legacy or even COTS platforms that aren’t totally under our con‐
trol, we also have to deal with what happens when we want to remove them or at least
move away from them. A useful pattern here is the Strangler Application Pattern.
Much like with our example of fronting the CMS system with our own code, with a
strangler you capture and intercept calls to the old system. This allows you to decide
if you route these calls to existing, legacy code, or direct them to new code you may
Integrating with Third-Party Software 
| 
77

---

## Page 98

have written. This allows you to replace functionality over time without requiring a
big bang rewrite.
When it comes to microservices, rather than having a single monolithic application
intercepting all calls to the existing legacy system, you may instead use a series of
microservices to perform this interception. Capturing and redirecting the original
calls can become more complex in this situation, and you may require the use of a
proxy to do this for you.
Summary
We’ve looked at a number of different options around integration, and I’ve shared my
thoughts on what choices are most likely to ensure our microservices remain as
decoupled as possible from their other collaborators:
• Avoid database integration at all costs.
• Understand the trade-offs between REST and RPC, but strongly consider REST
as a good starting point for request/response integration.
• Prefer choreography over orchestration.
• Avoid breaking changes and the need to version by understanding Postel’s Law
and using tolerant readers.
• Think of user interfaces as compositional layers.
We covered quite a lot here, and weren’t able to go into depth on all of these topics.
Nonetheless, this should be a good foundation to get you going and point you in the
right direction if you want to learn more.
We also spent some time looking at how to work with systems that aren’t completely
under our control in the form of COTS products. It turns out that this description
can just as easily apply to software we wrote!
Some of the approaches outlined here apply equally well to legacy software, but what
if we want to tackle the often-monumental task of bringing these older systems to
heel and decomposing them into more usable parts? We’ll discuss that in detail in the
next chapter.
78 
| 
Chapter 4: Integration

---

## Page 99

CHAPTER 5
Splitting the Monolith
We’ve discussed what a good service looks like, and why smaller servers may be better
for us. We also previously discussed the importance of being able to evolve the design
of our systems. But how do we handle the fact that we may already have a large num‐
ber of codebases lying about that don’t follow these patterns? How do we go about
decomposing these monolithic applications without having to embark on a big-bang
rewrite?
The monolith grows over time. It acquires new functionality and lines of code at an
alarming rate. Before long it becomes a big, scary giant presence in our organization
that people are scared to touch or change. But all is not lost! With the right tools at
our disposal, we can slay this beast.
It’s All About Seams
We discussed in Chapter 3 that we want our services to be highly cohesive and loosely
coupled. The problem with the monolith is that all too often it is the opposite of both.
Rather than tend toward cohesion, and keep things together that tend to change
together, we acquire and stick together all sorts of unrelated code. Likewise, loose
coupling doesn’t really exist: if I want to make a change to a line of code, I may be
able to do that easily enough, but I cannot deploy that change without potentially
impacting much of the rest of the monolith, and I’ll certainly have to redeploy the
entire system.
In his book Working Effectively with Legacy Code (Prentice-Hall), Michael Feathers
defines the concept of a seam—that is, a portion of the code that can be treated in
isolation and worked on without impacting the rest of the codebase. We also want to
identify seams. But rather than finding them for the purpose of cleaning up our code‐
base, we want to identify seams that can become service boundaries.
79

---

## Page 100

So what makes a good seam? Well, as we discussed previously, bounded contexts
make excellent seams, because by definition they represent cohesive and yet loosely
coupled boundaries in an organization. So the first step is to start identifying these
boundaries in our code.
Most programming languages provide namespace concepts that allow us to group
similar code together. Java’s package concept is a fairly weak example, but gives us
much of what we need. All other mainstream programming languages have similar
concepts built in, with JavaScript very arguably being an exception.
Breaking Apart MusicCorp
Imagine we have a large backend monolithic service that represents a substantial
amount of the behavior of MusicCorp’s online systems. To start, we should identify
the high-level bounded contexts that we think exist in our organization, as we dis‐
cussed in Chapter 3. Then we want to try to understand what bounded contexts the
monolith maps to. Let’s imagine that initially we identify four contexts we think our
monolithic backend covers:
Catalog
Everything to do with metadata about the items we offer for sale
Finance
Reporting for accounts, payments, refunds, etc.
Warehouse
Dispatching and returning of customer orders, managing inventory levels, etc.
Recommendation
Our patent-pending, revolutionary recommendation system, which is highly
complex code written by a team with more PhDs than the average science lab
The first thing to do is to create packages representing these contexts, and then move
the existing code into them. With modern IDEs, code movement can be done auto‐
matically via refactorings, and can be done incrementally while we are doing other
things. You’ll still need tests to catch any breakages made by moving code, however,
especially if you’re using a dynamically typed language where the IDEs have a harder
time of performing refactoring. Over time, we start to see what code fits well, and
what code is left over and doesn’t really fit anywhere. This remaining code will often
identify bounded contexts we might have missed!
During this process we can use code to analyze the dependencies between these pack‐
ages too. Our code should represent our organization, so our packages representing
the bounded contexts in our organization should interact in the same way the real-life
organizational groups in our domain interact. For example, tools like Structure 101
allow us to see the dependencies between packages graphically. If we spot things that
80 
| 
Chapter 5: Splitting the Monolith

---

## Page 101

look wrong—for example, the warehouse package depends on code in the finance
package when no such dependency exists in the real organization—then we can
investigate this problem and try to resolve it.
This process could take an afternoon on a small codebase, or several weeks or months
when you’re dealing with millions of lines of code. You may not need to sort all code
into domain-oriented packages before splitting out your first service, and indeed it
can be more valuable to concentrate your effort in one place. There is no need for this
to be a big-bang approach. It is something that can be done bit by bit, day by day, and
we have a lot of tools at our disposal to track our progress.
So now that we have our codebase organized around these seams, what next?
The Reasons to Split the Monolith
Deciding that you’d like a monolithic service or application to be smaller is a good
start. But I would strongly advise you to chip away at these systems. An incremental
approach will help you learn about microservices as you go, and will also limit the
impact of getting something wrong (and you will get things wrong!). Think of our
monolith as a block of marble. We could blow the whole thing up, but that rarely
ends well. It makes much more sense to just chip away at it incrementally.
So if we are going to break apart the monolith a piece at a time, where should we
start? We have our seams now, but which one should we pull out first? It’s best to
think about where you are going to get the most benefit from some part of your code‐
base being separated, rather than just splitting things for the sake of it. Let’s consider
some drivers that might help guide our chisel.
Pace of Change
Perhaps we know that we have a load of changes coming up soon in how we manage
inventory. If we split out the warehouse seam as a service now, we could change that
service faster, as it is a separate autonomous unit.
Team Structure
MusicCorp’s delivery team is actually split across two geographical regions. One team
is in London, the other in Hawaii (some people have it easy!). It would be great if we
could split out the code that the Hawaii team works on the most, so it can take full
ownership. We’ll explore this idea further in Chapter 10.
Security
MusicCorp has had a security audit, and has decided to tighten up its protection of
sensitive information. Currently, all of this is handled by the finance-related code. If
The Reasons to Split the Monolith 
| 
81

---

## Page 102

we split this service out, we can provide additional protections to this individual ser‐
vice in terms of monitoring, protection of data at transit, and protection of data at
rest—ideas we’ll look at in more detail in Chapter 9.
Technology
The team looking after our recommendation system has been spiking out some new
algorithms using a logic programming library in the language Clojure. The team
thinks this could benefit our customers by improving what we offer them. If we could
split out the recommendation code into a separate service, it would be easy to con‐
sider building an alternative implementation that we could test against.
Tangled Dependencies
The other point to consider when you’ve identified a couple of seams to separate is
how entangled that code is with the rest of the system. We want to pull out the seam
that is least depended on if we can. If you can view the various seams you have found
as a directed acyclical graph of dependencies (something the package modeling tools
I mentioned earlier are very good at), this can help you spot the seams that are likely
going to be harder to disentangle.
This brings us to what is often the mother of all tangled dependencies: the database.
The Database
We’ve already discussed at length the challenges of using databases as a method of
integrating multiple services. As I made it pretty clear earlier, I am not a fan! This
means we need to find seams in our databases too so we can split them out cleanly.
Databases, however, are tricky beasts.
Getting to Grips with the Problem
The first step is to take a look at the code itself and see which parts of it read to and
write from the database. A common practice is to have a repository layer, backed by
some sort of framework like Hibernate, to bind your code to the database, making it
easy to map objects or data structures to and from the database. If you have been fol‐
lowing along so far, you’ll have grouped our code into packages representing our
bounded contexts; we want to do the same for our database access code. This may
require splitting up the repository layer into several parts, as shown in Figure 5-1.
82 
| 
Chapter 5: Splitting the Monolith

---

## Page 103

Figure 5-1. Splitting out our repository layers
Having the database mapping code colocated inside the code for a given context can
help us understand what parts of the database are used by what bits of code. Hiber‐
nate, for example, can make this very clear if you are using something like a mapping
file per bounded context.
This doesn’t give us the whole story, however. For example, we may be able to tell that
the finance code uses the ledger table, and that the catalog code uses the line item
table, but it might not be clear that the database enforces a foreign key relationship
from the ledger table to the line item table. To see these database-level constraints,
which may be a stumbling block, we need to use another tool to visualize the data. A
great place to start is to use a tool like the freely available SchemaSpy, which can gen‐
erate graphical representations of the relationships between tables.
All this helps you understand the coupling between tables that may span what will
eventually become service boundaries. But how do you cut those ties? And what
about cases where the same tables are used from multiple different bounded contexts?
Handling problems like these is not easy, and there are many answers, but it is doable.
Coming back to some concrete examples, let’s consider our music shop again. We
have identified four bounded contexts, and want to move forward with making them
four distinct, collaborating services. We’re going to look at a few concrete examples of
problems we might face, and their potential solutions. And while some of these
examples talk specifically about challenges encountered in standard relational databa‐
ses, you will find similar problems in other alternative NOSQL stores.
Getting to Grips with the Problem 
| 
83

---

## Page 104

Example: Breaking Foreign Key Relationships
In this example, our catalog code uses a generic line item table to store information
about an album. Our finance code uses a ledger table to track financial transactions.
At the end of each month we need to generate reports for various people in the orga‐
nization so they can see how we’re doing. We want to make the reports nice and easy
to read, so rather than saying, “We sold 400 copies of SKU 12345 and made $1,300,”
we’d like to add more information about what was sold (i.e., “We sold 400 copies of
Bruce Springsteen’s Greatest Hits and made $1,300”). To do this, our reporting code in
the finance package will reach into the line item table to pull out the title for the SKU.
It may also have a foreign key constraint from the ledger to the line item table, as we
see in Figure 5-2.
Figure 5-2. Foreign key relationship
So how do we fix things here? Well, we need to make a change in two places. First, we
need to stop the finance code from reaching into the line item table, as this table
really belongs to the catalog code, and we don’t want database integration happening
once catalog and finance are services in their own rights. The quickest way to address
this is rather than having the code in finance reach into the line item table, we’ll
expose the data via an API call in the catalog package that the finance code can call.
This API call will be the forerunner of a call we will make over the wire, as we see in
Figure 5-3.
84 
| 
Chapter 5: Splitting the Monolith

---

## Page 105

Figure 5-3. Post removal of the foreign key relationship
At this point it becomes clear that we may well end up having to make two database
calls to generate the report. This is correct. And the same thing will happen if these
are two separate services. Typically concerns around performance are now raised. I
have a fairly easy answer to those: how fast does your system need to be? And how
fast is it now? If you can test its current performance and know what good perfor‐
mance looks like, then you should feel confident in making a change. Sometimes
making one thing slower in exchange for other things is the right thing to do, espe‐
cially if slower is still perfectly acceptable.
But what about the foreign key relationship? Well, we lose this altogether. This
becomes a constraint we need to now manage in our resulting services rather than in
the database level. This may mean that we need to implement our own consistency
check across services, or else trigger actions to clean up related data. Whether or not
this is needed is often not a technologist’s choice to make. For example, if our order
service contains a list of IDs for catalog items, what happens if a catalog item is
removed and an order now refers to an invalid catalog ID? Should we allow it? If we
do, then how is this represented in the order when it is displayed? If we don’t, then
how can we check that this isn’t violated? These are questions you’ll need to get
answered by the people who define how your system should behave for its users.
Example: Shared Static Data
I have seen perhaps as many country codes stored in databases (shown in Figure 5-4)
as I have written StringUtils classes for in-house Java projects. This seems to imply
that we plan to change the countries our system supports way more frequently than
we’ll deploy new code, but whatever the real reason, these examples of shared static
data being stored in databases come up a lot. So what do we do in our music shop if
all our potential services read from the same table like this?
Example: Shared Static Data 
| 
85

---

## Page 106

Figure 5-4. Country codes in the database
Well, we have a few options. One is to duplicate this table for each of our packages,
with the long-term view that it will be duplicated within each service also. This leads
to a potential consistency challenge, of course: what happens if I update one table to
reflect the creation of Newmantopia off the east coast of Australia, but not another?
A second option is to instead treat this shared, static data as code. Perhaps it could be
in a property file deployed as part of the service, or perhaps just as an enumeration.
The problems around the consistency of data remain, although experience has shown
that it is far easier to push out changes to configuration files than alter live database
tables. This is often a very sensible approach.
A third option, which may well be extreme, is to push this static data into a service of
its own right. In a couple of situations I have encountered, the volume, complexity,
and rules associated with the static reference data were sufficient that this approach
was warranted, but it’s probably overkill if we are just talking about country codes!
Personally, in most situations I’d try to push for keeping this data in configuration
files or directly in code, as it is the simple option for most cases.
Example: Shared Data
Now let’s dive into a more complex example, but one that can be a common problem
when you’re trying to tease apart systems: shared mutable data. Our finance code
tracks payments made by customers for their orders, and also tracks refunds given to
them when they return items. Meanwhile, the warehouse code updates records to
show that orders for customers have been dispatched or received. All of this data is
displayed in one convenient place on the website so that customers can see what is
going on with their account. To keep things simple, we have stored all this informa‐
tion in a fairly generic customer record table, as shown in Figure 5-5.
86 
| 
Chapter 5: Splitting the Monolith

---

## Page 107

Figure 5-5. Accessing customer data: are we missing something?
So both the finance and the warehouse code are writing to, and probably occasionally
reading from, the same table. How can we tease this apart? What we actually have
here is something you’ll see often—a domain concept that isn’t modeled in the code,
and is in fact implicitly modeled in the database. Here, the domain concept that is
missing is that of Customer.
We need to make the current abstract concept of the customer concrete. As a transi‐
ent step, we create a new package called Customer. We can then use an API to expose
Customer code to other packages, such as finance or warehouse. Rolling this all the
way forward, we may now end up with a distinct customer service (Figure 5-6).
Figure 5-6. Recognizing the bounded context of the customer
Example: Shared Tables
Figure 5-7 shows our last example. Our catalog needs to store the name and price of
the records we sell, and the warehouse needs to keep an electronic record of inven‐
tory. We decide to keep these two things in the same place in a generic line item table.
Before, with all the code merged in together, it wasn’t clear that we are actually
Example: Shared Tables 
| 
87

---

## Page 108

conflating concerns, but now we can see that in fact we have two separate concepts
that could be stored differently.
Figure 5-7. Tables being shared between different contexts
The answer here is to split the table in two as we have in Figure 5-8, perhaps creating
a stock list table for the warehouse, and a catalog entry table for the catalog details.
Figure 5-8. Pulling apart the shared table
Refactoring Databases
What we have covered in the preceding examples are a few database refactorings that
can help you separate your schemas. For a more detailed discussion of the subject,
you may want to take a look at Refactoring Databases by Scott J. Ambler and Pramod
J. Sadalage (Addison-Wesley).
88 
| 
Chapter 5: Splitting the Monolith

---

## Page 109

Staging the Break
So we’ve found seams in our application code, grouping it around bounded contexts.
We’ve used this to identify seams in the database, and we’ve done our best to split
those out. What next? Do you do a big-bang release, going from one monolithic ser‐
vice with a single schema to two services, each with its own schema? I would actually
recommend that you split out the schema but keep the service together before split‐
ting the application code out into separate microservices, as shown in Figure 5-9.
Figure 5-9. Staging a service separation
With a separate schema, we’ll be potentially increasing the number of database calls
to perform a single action. Where before we might have been able to have all the data
we wanted in a single SELECT statement, now we may need to pull the data back from
two locations and join in memory. Also, we end up breaking transactional integrity
when we move to two schemas, which could have significant impact on our applica‐
tions; we’ll be discussing this next. By splitting the schemas out but keeping the appli‐
cation code together, we give ourselves the ability to revert our changes or continue to
tweak things without impacting any consumers of our service. Once we are satisfied
that the DB separation makes sense, we can then think about splitting out the appli‐
cation code into two services.
Transactional Boundaries
Transactions are useful things. They allow us to say these events either all happen
together, or none of them happen. They are very useful when we’re inserting data into a
database; they let us update multiple tables at once, knowing that if anything fails,
everything gets rolled back, ensuring our data doesn’t get into an inconsistent state.
Simply put, a transaction allows us to group together multiple different activities that
Transactional Boundaries 
| 
89

---

## Page 110

take our system from one consistent state to another—everything works, or nothing
changes.
Transactions don’t just apply to databases, although we most often use them in that
context. Message brokers, for example, have long allowed you to post and receive
messages within transactions too.
With a monolithic schema, all our create or updates will probably be done within a
single transactional boundary. When we split apart our databases, we lose the safety
afforded to us by having a single transaction. Consider a simple example in the
MusicCorp context. When creating an order, I want to update the order table stating
that a customer order has been created, and also put an entry into a table for the
warehouse team so it knows there is an order that needs to be picked for dispatch.
We’ve gotten as far as grouping our application code into separate packages, and have
also separated the customer and warehouse parts of the schema well enough that we
are ready to put them into their own schemas prior to separating the application
code.
Within a single transaction in our existing monolithic schema, creating the order and
inserting the record for the warehouse team takes place within a single transaction, as
shown in Figure 5-10.
Figure 5-10. Updating two tables in a single transaction
But if we have pulled apart the schema into two separate schemas, one for customer-
related data including our order table, and another for the warehouse, we have lost
this transactional safety. The order placing process now spans two separate transac‐
tional boundaries, as we see in Figure 5-11. If our insert into the order table fails, we
can clearly stop everything, leaving us in a consistent state. But what happens when
the insert into the order table works, but the insert into the picking table fails?
90 
| 
Chapter 5: Splitting the Monolith

---

## Page 111

Figure 5-11. Spanning transactional boundaries for a single operation
Try Again Later
The fact that the order was captured and placed might be enough for us, and we may
decide to retry the insertion into the warehouse’s picking table at a later date. We
could queue up this part of the operation in a queue or logfile, and try again later. For
some sorts of operations this makes sense, but we have to assume that a retry would
fix it.
In many ways, this is another form of what is called eventual consistency. Rather than
using a transactional boundary to ensure that the system is in a consistent state when
the transaction completes, instead we accept that the system will get itself into a con‐
sistent state at some point in the future. This approach is especially useful with busi‐
ness operations that might be long-lived. We’ll discuss this idea in more depth in
Chapter 11 when we cover scaling patterns.
Abort the Entire Operation
Another option is to reject the entire operation. In this case, we have to put the sys‐
tem back into a consistent state. The picking table is easy, as that insert failed, but we
have a committed transaction in the order table. We need to unwind this. What we
have to do is issue a compensating transaction, kicking off a new transaction to wind
back what just happened. For us, that could be something as simple as issuing a
DELETE statement to remove the order from the database. Then we’d also need to
report back via the UI that the operation failed. Our application could handle both
aspects within a monolithic system, but we’d have to consider what we could do when
we split up the application code. Does the logic to handle the compensating transac‐
tion live in the customer service, the order service, or somewhere else?
Transactional Boundaries 
| 
91

---

## Page 112

But what happens if our compensating transaction fails? It’s certainly possible. Then
we’d have an order in the order table with no matching pick instruction. In this situa‐
tion, you’d either need to retry the compensating transaction, or allow some backend
process to clean up the inconsistency later on. This could be something as simple as a
maintenance screen that admin staff had access to, or an automated process.
Now think about what happens if we have not one or two operations we want to be
consistent, but three, four, or five. Handling compensating transactions for each fail‐
ure mode becomes quite challenging to comprehend, let alone implement.
Distributed Transactions
An alternative to manually orchestrating compensating transactions is to use a dis‐
tributed transaction. Distributed transactions try to span multiple transactions within
them, using some overall governing process called a transaction manager to orches‐
trate the various transactions being done by underlying systems. Just as with a normal
transaction, a distributed transaction tries to ensure that everything remains in a con‐
sistent state, only in this case it tries to do so across multiple different systems run‐
ning in different processes, often communicating across network boundaries.
The most common algorithm for handling distributed transactions—especially short-
lived transactions, as in the case of handling our customer order—is to use a two-
phase commit. With a two-phase commit, first comes the voting phase. This is where
each participant (also called a cohort in this context) in the distributed transaction
tells the transaction manager whether it thinks its local transaction can go ahead. If
the transaction manager gets a yes vote from all participants, then it tells them all to
go ahead and perform their commits. A single no vote is enough for the transaction
manager to send out a rollback to all parties.
This approach relies on all parties halting until the central coordinating process tells
them to proceed. This means we are vulnerable to outages. If the transaction manager
goes down, the pending transactions never complete. If a cohort fails to respond dur‐
ing voting, everything blocks. And there is also the case of what happens if a commit
fails after voting. There is an assumption implicit in this algorithm that this cannot
happen: if a cohort says yes during the voting period, then we have to assume it will
commit. Cohorts need a way of making this commit work at some point. This means
this algorithm isn’t foolproof—rather, it just tries to catch most failure cases.
This coordination process also mean locks; that is, pending transactions can hold
locks on resources. Locks on resources can lead to contention, making scaling sys‐
tems much more difficult, especially in the context of distributed systems.
Distributed transactions have been implemented for specific technology stacks, such
as Java’s Transaction API, allowing for disparate resources like a database and a mes‐
sage queue to all participate in the same, overarching transaction. The various algo‐
92 
| 
Chapter 5: Splitting the Monolith

---

## Page 113

rithms are hard to get right, so I’d suggest you avoid trying to create your own.
Instead, do lots of research on this topic if this seems like the route you want to take,
and see if you can use an existing implementation.
So What to Do?
All of these solutions add complexity. As you can see, distributed transactions are
hard to get right and can actually inhibit scaling. Systems that eventually converge
through compensating retry logic can be harder to reason about, and may need other
compensating behavior to fix up inconsistencies in data.
When you encounter business operations that currently occur within a single transac‐
tion, ask yourself if they really need to. Can they happen in different, local transac‐
tions, and rely on the concept of eventual consistency? These systems are much easier
to build and scale (we’ll discuss this more in Chapter 11).
If you do encounter state that really, really wants to be kept consistent, do everything
you can to avoid splitting it up in the first place. Try really hard. If you really need to
go ahead with the split, think about moving from a purely technical view of the pro‐
cess (e.g., a database transaction) and actually create a concrete concept to represent
the transaction itself. This gives you a handle, or a hook, on which to run other oper‐
ations like compensating transactions, and a way to monitor and manage these more
complex concepts in your system. For example, you might create the idea of an “in-
process-order” that gives you a natural place to focus all logic around processing the
order end to end (and dealing with exceptions).
Reporting
As we’ve already seen, in splitting a service into smaller parts, we need to also poten‐
tially split up how and where data is stored. This creates a problem, however, when it
comes to one vital and common use case: reporting.
A change in architecture as fundamental as moving to a microservices architecture
will cause a lot of disruption, but it doesn’t mean we have to abandon everything we
do. The audience of our reporting systems are users like any other, and we need to
consider their needs. It would be arrogant to fundamentally change our architecture
and just ask them to adapt. While I’m not suggesting that the space of reporting isn’t
ripe for disruption—it certainly is—there is value in determining how to work with
existing processes first. Sometimes we have to pick our battles.
The Reporting Database
Reporting typically needs to group together data from across multiple parts of our
organization in order to generate useful output. For example, we might want to
Reporting 
| 
93

---

## Page 114

enrich the data from our general ledger with descriptions of what was sold, which we
get from a catalog. Or we might want to look at the shopping behavior of specific,
high-value customers, which could require information from their purchase history
and their customer profile.
In a standard, monolithic service architecture, all our data is stored in one big data‐
base. This means all the data is in one place, so reporting across all the information is
actually pretty easy, as we can simply join across the data via SQL queries or the like.
Typically we won’t run these reports on the main database for fear of the load gener‐
ated by our queries impacting the performance of the main system, so often these
reporting systems hang on a read replica as shown in Figure 5-12.
Figure 5-12. Standard read replication
With this approach we have one sizeable upside—that all the data is already in one
place, so we can use fairly straightforward tools to query it. But there are also a couple
of downsides with this approach. First, the schema of the database is now effectively a
shared API between the running monolithic services and any reporting system. So a
change in schema has to be carefully managed. In reality, this is another impediment
that reduces the chances of anyone wanting to take on the task of making and coordi‐
nating such a change.
Second, we have limited options as to how the database can be optimized for either
use case—backing the live system or the reporting system. Some databases let us
make optimizations on read replicas to enable faster, more efficient reporting; for
example, MySQL would allow us to run a different backend that doesn’t have the
overhead of managing transactions. However, we cannot structure the data differ‐
ently to make reporting faster if that change in data structure has a bad impact on the
running system. What often happens is that the schema either ends up being great for
one use case and lousy for the other, or else becomes the lowest common denomina‐
tor, great for neither purpose.
Finally, the database options available to us have exploded recently. While standard
relational databases expose SQL query interfaces that work with many reporting
tools, they aren’t always the best option for storing data for our running services.
94 
| 
Chapter 5: Splitting the Monolith

---

## Page 115

What if our application data is better modeled as a graph, as in Neo4j? Or what if we’d
rather use a document store like MongoDB? Likewise, what if we wanted to explore
using a column-oriented database like Cassandra for our reporting system, which
makes it much easier to scale for larger volumes? Being constrained in having to have
one database for both purposes results in us often not being able to make these
choices and explore new options.
So it’s not perfect, but it works (mostly). Now if our information is stored in multiple
different systems, what do we do? Is there a way for us to bring all the data together to
run our reports? And could we also potentially find a way to eliminate some of the
downsides associated with the standard reporting database model?
It turns out we have a number of viable alternatives to this approach. Which solution
makes the most sense to you will depend on a number of factors, but we’ll explore a
few different options that I have seen in practice.
Data Retrieval via Service Calls
There are many variants of this model, but they all rely on pulling the required data
from the source systems via API calls. For a very simple reporting system, like a dash‐
board that might just want to show the number of orders placed in the last 15
minutes, this might be fine. To report across data from two or more systems, you
need to make multiple calls to assemble this data.
This approach breaks down rapidly with use cases that require larger volumes of data,
however. Imagine a use case where we want to report on customer purchasing behav‐
ior for our music shop over the last 24 months, looking at various trends in customer
behavior and how this has impacted on revenue. We need to pull large volumes of
data from at least the customer and finance systems. Keeping a local copy of this data
in the reporting system is dangerous, as we may not know if it has changed (even his‐
toric data may be changed after the fact), so to generate an accurate report we need all
of the finance and customer records for the last two years. With even modest num‐
bers of customers, you can see that this quickly will become a very slow operation.
Reporting systems also often rely on third-party tools that expect to retrieve data in a
certain way, and here providing a SQL interface is the fastest way to ensure your
reporting tool chain is as easy to integrate with as possible. We could still use this
approach to pull data periodically into a SQL database, of course, but this still
presents us with some challenges.
One of the key challenges is that the APIs exposed by the various microservices may
well not be designed for reporting use cases. For example, a customer service may
allow us to find a customer by an ID, or search for a customer by various fields, but
wouldn’t necessarily expose an API to retrieve all customers. This could lead to many
calls being made to retrieve all the data—for example, having to iterate through a list
Data Retrieval via Service Calls 
| 
95

---

## Page 116

of all the customers, making a separate call for each one. Not only could this be ineffi‐
cient for the reporting system, it could generate load for the service in question too.
While we could speed up some of the data retrieval by adding cache headers to the
resources exposed by our service, and have this data cached in something like a
reverse proxy, the nature of reporting is often that we access the long tail of data. This
means that we may well request resources that no one else has requested before (or at
least not for a sufficiently long time), resulting in a potentially expensive cache miss.
You could resolve this by exposing batch APIs to make reporting easier. For example,
our customer service could allow you to pass a list of customer IDs to it to retrieve
them in batches, or may even expose an interface that lets you page through all the
customers. A more extreme version of this is to model the batch request as a resource
in its own right. For example, the customer service might expose something like a
BatchCustomerExport resource endpoint. The calling system would POST a
BatchRequest, perhaps passing in a location where a file can be placed with all the
data. The customer service would return an HTTP 202 response code, indicating that
the request was accepted but has not yet been processed. The calling system could
then poll the resource waiting until it retrieves a 201 Created status, indicating that
the request has been fulfilled, and then the calling system could go and fetch the data.
This would allow potentially large data files to be exported without the overhead of
being sent over HTTP; instead, the system could simply save a CSV file to a shared
location.
I have seen the preceding approach used for batch insertion of data, where it worked
well. I am less in favor of it for reporting systems, however, as I feel that there are
other, potentially simpler solutions that can scale more effectively when you’re deal‐
ing with traditional reporting needs.
Data Pumps
Rather than have the reporting system pull the data, we could instead have the data
pushed to the reporting system. One of the downsides of retrieving the data by stan‐
dard HTTP calls is the overhead of HTTP when we’re making a large number of calls,
together with the overhead of having to create APIs that may exist only for reporting
purposes. An alternative option is to have a standalone program that directly accesses
the database of the service that is the source of data, and pumps it into a reporting
database, as shown in Figure 5-13.
96 
| 
Chapter 5: Splitting the Monolith

---

## Page 117

Figure 5-13. Using a data pump to periodically push data to a central reporting database
At this point you’ll be saying, “But Sam, you said having lots of programs integrating
on the same database is a bad idea!” At least I hope you’ll be saying that, given how
firmly I made the point earlier! This approach, if implemented properly, is a notable
exception, where the downsides of the coupling are more than mitigated by making
the reporting easier.
To start with, the data pump should be built and managed by the same team that
manages the service. This can be something as simple as a command-line program
triggered via Cron. This program needs to have intimate knowledge of both the inter‐
nal database for the service, and also the reporting schema. The pump’s job is to map
one from the other. We try to reduce the problems with coupling to the service’s
schema by having the same team that manages the service also manage the pump. I
would suggest, in fact, that you version-control these together, and have builds of the
data pump created as an additional artifact as part of the build of the service itself,
with the assumption that whenever you deploy one of them, you deploy them both.
As we explicitly state that we deploy these together, and don’t open up access to the
schema to anyone outside of the service team, many of the traditional DB integration
challenges are largely mitigated.
The coupling on the reporting schema itself remains, but we have to treat it as a pub‐
lished API that is hard to change. Some databases give us techniques where we could
further mitigate this cost. Figure 5-14 shows an example of this for relational databa‐
ses, where we could have one schema in the reporting database for each service, using
things like materialized views to create the aggregated view. That way, we expose only
the reporting schema for the customer data to the customer data pump. Whether this
is something that you can do in a performant manner, however, will depend on the
capabilities of the database you picked for reporting.
Data Pumps 
| 
97

---

## Page 118

Figure 5-14. Utilizing materialized views to form a single monolithic reporting schema
Here, of course, the complexity of integration is pushed deeper into the schema, and
will rely on capabilities in the database to make such a setup performant. While I
think data pumps in general are a sensible and workable suggestion, I am less con‐
vinced that the complexity of a segmented schema is worthwhile, especially given the
challenges in managing change in the database.
Alternative Destinations
On one project I was involved with, we used a series of data pumps to populate JSON
files in AWS S3, effectively using S3 to masquerade as a giant data mart! This
approach worked very well until we needed to scale our solution, and at the time of
writing we are looking to change these pumps to instead populate a cube that can be
integrated with standard reporting tools like Excel and Tableau.
Event Data Pump
In Chapter 4, we touched on the idea of microservices emitting events based on the
state change of entities that they manage. For example, our customer service may
emit an event when a given customer is created, or updated, or deleted. For those
microservices that expose such event feeds, we have the option of writing our own
event subscriber that pumps data into the reporting database, as shown in
Figure 5-15.
98 
| 
Chapter 5: Splitting the Monolith

---

## Page 119

Figure 5-15. An event data pump using state change events to populate a reporting
database
The coupling on the underlying database of the source microservice is now avoided.
Instead, we are just binding to the events emitted by the service, which are designed
to be exposed to external consumers. Given that events are temporal in nature, it also
makes it easier for us to be smarter in what data we sent to our central reporting
store; we can send data to the reporting system as we see an event, allowing data to
flow faster to our reporting system, rather than relying on a regular schedule as with
the data pump.
Also, if we store which events have already been processed, we can just process the
new events as they arrive, assuming the old events have already been mapped into the
reporting system. This means our insertion will be more efficient, as we only need to
send deltas. We can do similar things with a data pump, but we have to manage this
ourselves, whereas the fundamentally temporal nature of the stream of events (x hap‐
pens at timestamp y) helps us greatly.
As our event data pump is less coupled to the internals of the service, it is also easier
to consider this being managed by a separate group from the team looking after the
microservice itself. As long as the nature of our event stream doesn’t overly couple
subscribers to changes in the service, this event mapper can evolve independently of
the service it subscribes to.
The main downsides to this approach are that all the required information must be
broadcast as events, and it may not scale as well as a data pump for larger volumes of
data that has the benefit of operating directly at the database level. Nonetheless, the
looser coupling and fresher data available via such an approach makes it strongly
worth considering if you are already exposing the appropriate events.
Backup Data Pump
This option is based on an approach used at Netflix, which takes advantage of exist‐
ing backup solutions and also resolves some scale issues that Netflix has to deal with.
In some ways, you can consider this a special case of a data pump, but it seemed like
such an interesting solution that it deserves inclusion.
Netflix has decided to standardize on Cassandra as the backing store for its services,
of which there are many. Netflix has invested significant time in building tools to
Backup Data Pump 
| 
99

---

## Page 120

make Cassandra easy to work with, much of which the company has shared with the
rest of the world via numerous open source projects. Obviously it is very important
that the data Netflix stores is properly backed up. To back up Cassandra data, the
standard approach is to make a copy of the data files that back it and store them
somewhere safe. Netflix stores these files, known as SSTables, in Amazon’s S3 object
store, which provides significant data durability guarantees.
Netflix needs to report across all this data, but given the scale involved this is a non‐
trivial challenge. Its approach is to use Hadoop that uses SSTable backup as the source
of its jobs. In the end, Netflix ended up implementing a pipeline capable of process‐
ing large amounts of data using this approach, which it then open sourced as the
Aegisthus project. Like data pumps, though, with this pattern we still have a coupling
to the destination reporting schema (or target system).
It is conceivable that using a similar approach—that is, using mappers that work off
backups—would work in other contexts as well. And if you’re already using Cassan‐
dra, Netflix has already done much of the work for you!
Toward Real Time
Many of the patterns previously outlined are different ways of getting a lot of data
from many different places to one place. But does the idea that all our reporting will
be done from one location really stack up anymore? We have dashboards, alerting,
financial reports, user analytics—all of these use cases have different tolerances for
accuracy and timeliness, which may result in different technical options coming to
bear. As I will detail in Chapter 8, we are moving more and more toward generic
eventing systems capable of routing our data to multiple different places depending
on need.
Cost of Change
There are many reasons why, throughout the book, I promote the need to make
small, incremental changes, but one of the key drivers is to understand the impact of
each alteration we make and change course if required. This allows us to better miti‐
gate the cost of mistakes, but doesn’t remove the chance of mistakes entirely. We
can—and will—make mistakes, and we should embrace that. What we should also do,
though, is understand how best to mitigate the costs of those mistakes.
As we have seen, the cost involved in moving code around within a codebase is pretty
small. We have lots of tools that support us, and if we cause a problem, the fix is gen‐
erally quick. Splitting apart a database, however, is much more work, and rolling back
a database change is just as complex. Likewise, untangling an overly coupled integra‐
tion between services, or having to completely rewrite an API that is used by multiple
consumers, can be a sizeable undertaking. The large cost of change means that these
100 
| 
Chapter 5: Splitting the Monolith

---

## Page 121

operations are increasingly risky. How can we manage this risk? My approach is to try
to make mistakes where the impact will be lowest.
I tend to do much of my thinking in the place where the cost of change and the cost
of mistakes is as low as it can be: the whiteboard. Sketch out your proposed design.
See what happens when you run use cases across what you think your service bound‐
aries will be. For our music shop, for example, imagine what happens when a cus‐
tomer searches for a record, registers with the website, or purchases an album. What
calls get made? Do you start seeing odd circular references? Do you see two services
that are overly chatty, which might indicate they should be one thing?
A great technique here is to adapt an approach more typically taught for the design of
object-oriented systems: class-responsibility-collaboration (CRC) cards. With CRC
cards, you write on one index card the name of the class, what its responsibilities are,
and who it collaborates with. When working through a proposed design, for each ser‐
vice I list its responsibilities in terms of the capabilities it provides, with the collabo‐
rators specified in the diagram. As you work through more use cases, you start to get
a sense as to whether all of this hangs together properly.
Understanding Root Causes
We have discussed how to split apart larger services into smaller ones, but why did
these services grow so large in the first place? The first thing to understand is that
growing a service to the point that it needs to be split is completely OK. We want the
architecture of our system to change over time in an incremental fashion. The key is
knowing it needs to be split before the split becomes too expensive.
But in practice many of us will have seen services grow well beyond the point of san‐
ity. Despite knowing that a smaller set of services would be easier to deal with than
the huge monstrosity we currently have, we still plow on with growing the beast.
Why?
Part of the problem is knowing where to start, and I’m hoping this chapter has hel‐
ped. But another challenge is the cost associated with splitting out services. Finding
somewhere to run the service, spinning up a new service stack, and so on, are non‐
trivial tasks. So how do we address this? Well, if doing something is right but difficult,
we should strive to make things easier. Investment in libraries and lightweight service
frameworks can reduce the cost associated with creating the new service. Giving peo‐
ple access to self-service provision virtual machines or even making a platform as a
service (PaaS) available will make it easier to provision systems and test them.
Throughout the rest of the book, we’ll be discussing a number of ways to help you
keep this cost down.
Understanding Root Causes 
| 
101

---

## Page 122

Summary
We decompose our system by finding seams along which service boundaries can
emerge, and this can be an incremental approach. By getting good at finding these
seams and working to reduce the cost of splitting out services in the first place, we
can continue to grow and evolve our systems to meet whatever requirements come
down the road. As you can see, some of this work can be painstaking. But the very
fact that it can be done incrementally means there is no need to fear this work.
So now we can split our services out, but we’ve introduced some new problems too.
We have many more moving parts to get into production now! So next up we’ll dive
into the world of deployment.
102 
| 
Chapter 5: Splitting the Monolith

---

## Page 123

CHAPTER 6
Deployment
Deploying a monolithic application is a fairly straightforward process. Microservices,
with their interdependence, are a different kettle of fish altogether. If you don’t
approach deployment right, it’s one of those areas where the complexity can make
your life a misery. In this chapter, we’re going to look at some techniques and tech‐
nology that can help us when deploying microservices into fine-grained architec‐
tures.
We’re going to start off, though, by taking a look at continuous integration and con‐
tinuous delivery. These related but different concepts will help shape the other deci‐
sions we’ll make when thinking about what to build, how to build it, and how to
deploy it.
A Brief Introduction to Continuous Integration
Continuous integration (CI) has been around for a number of years at this point. It’s
worth spending a bit of time going over the basics, however, as especially when we
think about the mapping between microservices, builds, and version control reposi‐
tories, there are some different options to consider.
With CI, the core goal is to keep everyone in sync with each other, which we achieve
by making sure that newly checked-in code properly integrates with existing code. To
do this, a CI server detects that the code has been committed, checks it out, and car‐
ries out some verification like making sure the code compiles and that tests pass.
As part of this process, we often create artifact(s) that are used for further validation,
such as deploying a running service to run tests against it. Ideally, we want to build
these artifacts once and once only, and use them for all deployments of that version of
the code. This is in order to avoid doing the same thing over and over again, and so
that we can confirm that the artifact we deployed is the one we tested. To enable these
103

---

## Page 124

artifacts to be reused, we place them in a repository of some sort, either provided by
the CI tool itself or on a separate system.
We’ll be looking at what sorts of artifacts we can use for microservices shortly, and
we’ll look in depth at testing in Chapter 7.
CI has a number of benefits. We get some level of fast feedback as to the quality of
our code. It allows us to automate the creation of our binary artifacts. All the code
required to build the artifact is itself version controlled, so we can re-create the arti‐
fact if needed. We also get some level of traceability from a deployed artifact back to
the code, and depending on the capabilities of the CI tool itself, can see what tests
were run on the code and artifact too. It’s for these reasons that CI has been so suc‐
cessful.
Are You Really Doing It?
I suspect you are probably using continuous integration in your own organization. If
not, you should start. It is a key practice that allows us to make changes quickly and
easily, and without which the journey into microservices will be painful. That said, I
have worked with many teams who, despite saying that they do CI, aren’t actually
doing it at all. They confuse the use of a CI tool with adopting the practice of CI. The
tool is just something that enables the approach.
I really like Jez Humble’s three questions he asks people to test if they really under‐
stand what CI is about:
Do you check in to mainline once per day?
You need to make sure your code integrates. If you don’t check your code
together with everyone else’s changes frequently, you end up making future inte‐
gration harder. Even if you are using short-lived branches to manage changes,
integrate as frequently as you can into a single mainline branch.
Do you have a suite of tests to validate your changes?
Without tests, we just know that syntactically our integration has worked, but we
don’t know if we have broken the behavior of the system. CI without some verifi‐
cation that our code behaves as expected isn’t CI.
When the build is broken, is it the #1 priority of the team to fix it?
A passing green build means our changes have safely been integrated. A red build
means the last change possibly did not integrate. You need to stop all further
check-ins that aren’t involved in fixing the builds to get it passing again. If you let
more changes pile up, the time it takes to fix the build will increase drastically.
I’ve worked with teams where the build has been broken for days, resulting in
substantial efforts to eventually get a passing build.
104 
| 
Chapter 6: Deployment

---

## Page 125

Mapping Continuous Integration to Microservices
When thinking about microservices and continuous integration, we need to think
about how our CI builds map to individual microservices. As I have said many times,
we want to ensure that we can make a change to a single service and deploy it inde‐
pendently of the rest. With this in mind, how should we map individual microservi‐
ces to CI builds and source code?
If we start with the simplest option, we could lump everything in together. We have a
single, giant repository storing all our code, and have one single build, as we see in
Figure 6-1. Any check-in to this source code repository will cause our build to trigger,
where we will run all the verification steps associated with all our microservices, and
produce multiple artifacts, all tied back to the same build.
Figure 6-1. Using a single source code repository and CI build for all microservices
This seems much simpler on the surface than other approaches: fewer repositories to
worry about, and a conceptually simpler build. From a developer point of view, things
are pretty straightforward too. I just check code in. If I have to work on multiple serv‐
ices at once, I just have to worry about one commit.
This model can work perfectly well if you buy into the idea of lock-step releases,
where you don’t mind deploying multiple services at once. In general, this is abso‐
lutely a pattern to avoid, but very early on in a project, especially if only one team is
working on everything, this might make sense for short periods of time.
However, there are some significant downsides. If I make a one-line change to a sin‐
gle service—for example, changing the behavior in the user service in Figure 6-1—all
the other services get verified and built. This could take more time than needed—I’m
waiting for things that probably don’t need to be tested. This impacts our cycle time,
the speed at which we can move a single change from development to live. More
troubling, though, is knowing what artifacts should or shouldn’t be deployed. Do I
now need to deploy all the build services to push my small change into production? It
can be hard to tell; trying to guess which services really changed just by reading the
Mapping Continuous Integration to Microservices 
| 
105

---

## Page 126

commit messages is difficult. Organizations using this approach often fall back to just
deploying everything together, which we really want to avoid.
Furthermore, if my one-line change to the user service breaks the build, no other
changes can be made to the other services until that break is fixed. And think about a
scenario where you have multiple teams all sharing this giant build. Who is in charge?
A variation of this approach is to have one single source tree with all of the code in it,
with multiple CI builds mapping to parts of this source tree, as we see in Figure 6-2.
With well-defined structure, you can easily map the builds to certain parts of the
source tree. In general, I am not a fan of this approach, as this model can be a mixed
blessing. On the one hand, my check-in/check-out process can be simpler as I have
only one repository to worry about. On the other hand, it becomes very easy to get
into the habit of checking in source code for multiple services at once, which can
make it equally easy to slip into making changes that couple services together. I
would greatly prefer this approach, however, over having a single build for multiple
services.
Figure 6-2. A single source repo with subdirectories mapped to independent builds
So is there another alternative? The approach I prefer is to have a single CI build per
microservice, to allow us to quickly make and validate a change prior to deployment
into production, as shown in Figure 6-3. Here each microservice has its own source
code repository, mapped to its own CI build. When making a change, I run only the
build and tests I need to. I get a single artifact to deploy. Alignment to team owner‐
ship is more clear too. If you own the service, you own the repository and the build.
Making changes across repositories can be more difficult in this world, but I’d main‐
tain this is easier to resolve (e.g., by using command-line scripts) than the downside
of the monolithic source control and build process.
106 
| 
Chapter 6: Deployment

---

## Page 127

Figure 6-3. Using one source code repository and CI build per microservice
The tests for a given microservice should live in source control with the microservi‐
ce’s source code too, to ensure we always know what tests should be run against a
given service.
So, each microservice will live in its own source code repository, and its own CI build
process. We’ll use the CI build process to create our deployable artifacts too in a fully
automated fashion. Now lets look beyond CI to see how continuous delivery fits in.
Build Pipelines and Continuous Delivery
Very early on in using continuous integration, we realized the value in sometimes
having multiple stages inside a build. Tests are a very common case where this comes
into play. I may have a lot of fast, small-scoped tests, and a small number of large-
scoped, slow tests. If we run all the tests together, we may not be able to get fast feed‐
back when our fast tests fail if we’re waiting for our long-scoped slow tests to finally
finish. And if the fast tests fail, there probably isn’t much sense in running the slower
tests anyway! A solution to this problem is to have different stages in our build, creat‐
ing what is known as a build pipeline. One stage for the faster tests, one for the slower
tests.
This build pipeline concept gives us a nice way of tracking the progress of our soft‐
ware as it clears each stage, helping give us insight into the quality of our software.
We build our artifact, and that artifact is used throughout the pipeline. As our artifact
moves through these stages, we feel more and more confident that the software will
work in production.
Continuous delivery (CD) builds on this concept, and then some. As outlined in Jez
Humble and Dave Farley’s book of the same name, continuous delivery is the
approach whereby we get constant feedback on the production readiness of each and
every check-in, and furthermore treat each and every check-in as a release candidate.
Build Pipelines and Continuous Delivery 
| 
107

---

## Page 128

To fully embrace this concept, we need to model all the processes involved in getting
our software from check-in to production, and know where any given version of the
software is in terms of being cleared for release. In CD, we do this by extending the
idea of the multistage build pipeline to model each and every stage our software has
to go through, both manual and automated. In Figure 6-4, we see a sample pipeline
that may be familiar.
Figure 6-4. A standard release process modeled as a build pipeline
Here we really want a tool that embraces CD as a first-class concept. I have seen many
people try to hack and extend CI tools to make them do CD, often resulting in com‐
plex systems that are nowhere as easy to use as tools that build in CD from the begin‐
ning. Tools that fully support CD allow you to define and visualize these pipelines,
modeling the entire path to production for your software. As a version of our code
moves through the pipeline, if it passes one of these automated verification steps it
moves to the next stage. Other stages may be manual. For example, if we have a man‐
ual user acceptance testing (UAT) process I should be able to use a CD tool to model
it. I can see the next available build ready to be deployed into our UAT environment,
deploy it, and if it passes our manual checks, mark that stage as being successful so it
can move to the next.
By modeling the entire path to production for our software, we greatly improve visi‐
bility of the quality of our software, and can also greatly reduce the time taken
between releases, as we have one place to observe our build and release process, and
an obvious focal point for introducing improvements.
In a microservices world, where we want to ensure we can release our services inde‐
pendently of each other, it follows that as with CI, we’ll want one pipeline per service.
In our pipelines, it is an artifact that we want to create and move through our path to
production. As always, it turns out our artifacts can come in lots of sizes and shapes.
We’ll look at some of the most common options available to us in a moment.
And the Inevitable Exceptions
As with all good rules, there are exceptions we need to consider too. The “one micro‐
service per build” approach is absolutely something you should aim for, but are there
times when something else makes sense? When a team is starting out with a new
project, especially a greenfield one where they are working with a blank sheet of
paper, it is quite likely that there will be a large amount of churn in terms of working
out where the service boundaries lie. This is a good reason, in fact, for keeping your
initial services on the larger side until your understanding of the domain stabilizes.
108 
| 
Chapter 6: Deployment

---

## Page 129

During this time of churn, changes across service boundaries are more likely, and
what is in or not in a given service is likely to change frequently. During this period,
having all services in a single build to reduce the cost of cross-service changes may
make sense.
It does follow, though, that in this case you need to buy into releasing all the services
as a bundle. It also absolutely needs to be a transitionary step. As service APIs stabi‐
lize, start moving them out into their own builds. If after a few weeks (or a very small
number of months) you are unable to get stability in service boundaries in order to
properly separate them, merge them back into a more monolithic service (albeit
retaining modular separation within the boundary) and give yourself time to get to
grips with the domain. This reflects the experiences of our own SnapCI team, as we
discussed in Chapter 3.
Platform-Specific Artifacts
Most technology stacks have some sort of first-class artifact, along with tools to sup‐
port creating and installing them. Ruby has gems, Java has JAR files and WAR files,
and Python has eggs. Developers with experience in one of these stacks will be well
versed in working with (and hopefully creating) these artifacts.
From the point of view of a microservice, though, depending on your technology
stack, this artifact may not be enough by itself. While a Java JAR file can be made to
be executable and run an embedded HTTP process, for things like Ruby and Python
applications, you’ll expect to use a process manager running inside Apache or Nginx.
So we may need some way of installing and configuring other software that we need
in order to deploy and launch our artifacts. This is where automated configuration
management tools like Puppet and Chef can help.
Another downfall here is that these artifacts are specific to a certain technology stack,
which may make deployment more difficult when we have a mix of technologies in
play. Think of it from the point of view of someone trying to deploy multiple services
together. They could be a developer or tester wanting to test some functionality, or it
could be someone managing a production deployment. Now imagine that those serv‐
ices use three completely different deployment mechanisms. Perhaps we have a Ruby
Gem, a JAR file, and a nodeJS NPM package. Would they thank you?
Automation can go a long way toward hiding the differences in the deployment
mechanisms of the underlying artifacts. Chef, Puppet, and Ansible all support multi‐
ple different common technology-specific build artifacts too. But there are different
types of artifacts that might be even easier to work with.
Platform-Specific Artifacts 
| 
109

---

## Page 130

Operating System Artifacts
One way to avoid the problems associated with technology-specific artifacts is to cre‐
ate artifacts that are native to the underlying operating system. For example, for a
RedHat– or CentOS-based system, I might build RPMs; for Ubuntu, I might build a
deb package; or for Windows, an MSI.
The advantage of using OS-specific artifacts is that from a deployment point of view
we don’t care what the underlying technology is. We just use the tools native to the
OS to install the package. The OS tools can also help us uninstall and get information
about the packages too, and may even provide package repositories that our CI tools
can push to. Much of the work done by the OS package manager can also offset work
that you might otherwise do in a tool like Puppet or Chef. On all Linux platforms I
have used, for example, you can define dependencies from your packages to other
packages you rely on, and the OS tools will automatically install them for you too.
The downside can be the difficulty in creating the packages in the first place. For
Linux, the FPM package manager tool gives a nicer abstraction for creating Linux OS
packages, and converting from a tarball-based deployment to an OS-based deploy‐
ment can be fairly straightforward. The Windows space is somewhat trickier. The
native packaging system in the form of MSI installers and the like leave a lot to be
desired when compared to the capabilities in the Linux space. The NuGet package
system has started to help address this, at least in terms of helping manage develop‐
ment libraries. More recently, Chocolatey NuGet has extended these ideas, providing
a package manager for Windows designed for deploying tools and services, which is
much more like the package managers in the Linux space. This is certainly a step in
the right direction, although the fact that the idiomatic style in Windows is still deploy
something in IIS means that this approach may be unappealing for some Windows
teams.
Another downside, of course, could be if you are deploying onto multiple different
operating systems. The overhead of managing artifacts for different OSes could be
pretty steep. If you’re creating software for other people to install, you may not have a
choice. If you are installing software onto machines you control, however, I would
suggest you look at unifying or at least reducing the number of different operating
systems you use. It can greatly reduce variations in behavior from one machine to the
next, and simplify deployment and maintenance tasks.
In general, those teams I’ve seen that have moved to OS-based package management
have simplified their deployment approach, and tend to avoid the trap of big, com‐
plex deployment scripts. Especially if you’re on Linux, this can be a good way to sim‐
plify deployment of microservices using disparate technology stacks.
110 
| 
Chapter 6: Deployment

---

## Page 131

Custom Images
One of the challenges with automated configuration management systems like Pup‐
pet, Chef, and Ansible can be the time taken to run the scripts on a machine. Let’s
take a simple example of a server being provisioned and configured to allow for the
deployment of a Java application. Let’s assume I’m using AWS to provision the server,
using the standard Ubuntu image. The first thing I need to do is install the Oracle
JVM to run my Java application. I’ve seen this simple process take around five
minutes, with a couple of minutes taken up by the machine being provisioned, and a
few more to install the JVM. Then we can think about actually putting our software
on it.
This is actually a fairly trivial example. We will often want to install other common
bits of software. For example, we might want to use collectd for gathering OS stats,
use logstash for log aggregation, and perhaps install the appropriate bits of nagios for
monitoring (we’ll talk more about this software in Chapter 8). Over time, more
things might get added, leading to longer and longer amounts of time needed for pro‐
visioning of these dependencies.
Puppet, Chef, Ansible, and their ilk can be smart and will avoid installing software
that is already present. This does not mean that running the scripts on existing
machines will always be fast, unfortunately, as running all the checks takes time. We
also want to avoid keeping our machines around for too long, as we don’t want to
allow for too much configuration drift (which we’ll explore in more depth shortly).
And if we’re using an on-demand compute platform we might be constantly shutting
down and spinning up new instances on a daily basis (if not more frequently), so the
declarative nature of these configuration management tools may be of limited use.
Over time, watching the same tools get installed over and over again can become a
real drag. If you are trying to do this multiple times per day—perhaps as part of
development or CI—this becomes a real problem in terms of providing fast feedback.
It can also lead to increased downtime when deploying in production if your systems
don’t allow for zero-downtime deployment, as you’re waiting to install all the pre-
requisites on your machines even before you get to installing your software. Models
like blue/green deployment (which we’ll discuss in Chapter 7) can help mitigate this,
as they allow us to deploy a new version of our service without taking the old one
offline.
One approach to reducing this spin-up time is to create a virtual machine image that
bakes in some of the common dependencies we use, as shown in Figure 6-5. All virtu‐
alization platforms I’ve used allow you to build your own images, and the tools to do
so are much more advanced than they were even a few years ago. This shifts things
somewhat. Now we could bake the common tools into our own image. When we
Custom Images 
| 
111

---

## Page 132

want to deploy our software, we spin up an instance of this custom image, and all we
have to do is install the latest version of our service.
Figure 6-5. Creating a custom VM image
Of course, because you build the image only once, when you subsequently launch
copies of this image you don’t need to spend time installing your dependencies, as
they are already there. This can result in a significant time savings. If your core
dependencies don’t change, new versions of your service can continue to use the same
base image.
There are some drawbacks with this approach, though. Building images can take a
long time. This means that for developers you may want to support other ways of
deploying services to ensure they don’t have to wait half an hour just to create a
binary deployment. Second, some of the resulting images can be large. This could be
a real problem if you’re creating your own VMWare images, for example, as moving a
20GB image around a network isn’t always a simple activity. We’ll be looking at con‐
tainer technology shortly, and specifically Docker, which can avoid some of these
drawbacks.
Historically, one of the challenges is that the tool chain required to build such an
image varied from platform to platform. Building a VMWare image is different from
building an AWS AMI, a Vagrant image, or a Rackspace image. This may not have
been a problem if you had the same platform everywhere, but not all organizations
were this lucky. And even if they were, the tools in this space were often difficult to
work with, and they didn’t play nicely with other tools you might be using for
machine configuration.
Packer is a tool designed to make creation of images much easier. Using configuration
scripts of your choice (Chef, Ansible, Puppet, and more are supported), it allows us to
112 
| 
Chapter 6: Deployment

---

## Page 133

create images for different platforms from the same configuration. At the time of
writing, it has support for VMWare, AWS, Rackspace Cloud, Digital Ocean, and
Vagrant, and I’ve seen teams use it successfully for building Linux and Windows
images. This means you could create an image for deployment on your production
AWS environment and a matching Vagrant image for local development and test, all
from the same configuration.
Images as Artifacts
So we can create virtual machine images that bake in dependencies to speed up feed‐
back, but why stop there? We could go further, bake our service into the image itself,
and adopt the model of our service artifact being an image. Now, when we launch our
image, our service is there ready to go. This really fast spin-up time is the reason that
Netflix has adopted the model of baking its own services as AWS AMIs.
Just as with OS-specific packages, these VM images become a nice way of abstracting
out the differences in the technology stacks used to create the services. Do we care if
the service running on the image is written in Ruby or Java, and uses a gem or JAR
file? All we care about is that it works. We can focus our efforts, then, on automating
the creation and deployment of these images. This also becomes a really neat way to
implement another deployment concept, the immutable server.
Immutable Servers
By storing all our configuration in source control, we are trying to ensure that we can
automatically reproduce services and hopefully entire environments at will. But once
we run our deployment process, what happens if someone comes along, logs into the
box, and changes things independently of what is in source control? This problem is
often called configuration drift—the code in source control no longer reflects the con‐
figuration of the running host.
To avoid this, we can ensure that no changes are ever made to a running server.
Instead, any change, no matter how small, has to go through a build pipeline in order
to create a new machine. You can implement this pattern without using image-based
deployments, but it is also a logical extension of using images as artifacts. During our
image creation, for example, we could actually disable SSH, ensuring that no one
could even log onto the box to make a change!
The same caveats we discussed earlier about cycle time still apply, of course. And we
also need to ensure that any data we care about that is stored on the box is stored
elsewhere. These complexities aside, I’ve seen adopting this pattern lead to much
more straightforward deployments, and easier-to-reason-about environments. And
as I’ve already said, anything we can do to simplify things should be pursued!
Custom Images 
| 
113

---

## Page 134

Environments
As our software moves through our CD pipeline stages, it will also be deployed into
different types of environments. If we think of the example build pipeline in
Figure 6-4, we probably have to consider at least four distinct environments: one
environment where we run our slow tests, another for UAT, another for performance,
and a final one for production. Our microservice should be the same throughout, but
the environment will be different. At the very least, they’ll be separate, distinct collec‐
tions of configuration and hosts. But often they can vary much more than that. For
example, our production environment for our service might consist of multiple load-
balanced hosts spread across two data centers, whereas our test environment might
just have everything running on a single host. These differences in environments can
introduce a few problems.
I was bitten by this personally many years ago. We were deploying a Java web service
into a clustered WebLogic application container in production. This WebLogic cluster
replicated session state between multiple nodes, giving us some level of resilience if a
single node failed. However, the WebLogic licenses were expensive, as were the
machines our software was deployed onto. This meant that in our test environment,
our software was deployed on a single machine, in a nonclustered configuration.
This hurt us badly during one release. For WebLogic to be able to copy session state
between nodes, the session data needs to be properly serializable. Unfortunately, one
of our commits broke this, so when we deployed into production our session replica‐
tion failed. We ended up resolving this by pushing hard to replicate a clustered setup
in our test environment.
The service we want to deploy is the same in all these different environments, but
each of the environments serves a different purpose. On my developer laptop I want
to quickly deploy the service, potentially against stubbed collaborators, to run tests or
carry out some manual validation of behavior, whereas when I deploy into a produc‐
tion environment I may want to deploy multiple copies of my service in a load-
balanced fashion, perhaps split across one or more data centers for durability reasons.
As you move from your laptop to build server to UAT environment all the way to
production, you’ll want to ensure that your environments are more and more
production-like to catch any problems associated with these environmental differ‐
ences sooner. This will be a constant balance. Sometimes the time and cost to repro‐
duce production-like environments can be prohibitive, so you have to make
compromises. Additionally, sometimes using a production-like environment can slow
down feedback loops; waiting for 25 machines to install your software in AWS might
be much slower than simply deploying your service into a local Vagrant instance, for
example.
114 
| 
Chapter 6: Deployment

---

## Page 135

This balance, between production-like environments and fast feedback, won’t be
static. Keep an eye on the bugs you find further downstream and your feedback
times, and adjust this balance as required.
Managing environments for single-artfact monolithic systems can be challenging,
especially if you don’t have access to systems that are easily automatable. When you
think about multiple environments per microservice, this can be even more daunting.
We’ll look shortly at some different deployment platforms that can make this much
easier for us.
Service Configuration
Our services need some configuration. Ideally, this should be a small amount, and
limited to those features that change from one environment to another, such as what
username and password should I use to connect to my database? Configuration that
changes from one environment to another should be kept to an absolute minimum.
The more your configuration changes fundamental service behavior, and the more
that configuration varies from one environment to another, the more you will find
problems only in certain environments, which is painful in the extreme.
So if we have some configuration for our service that does change from one environ‐
ment to another, how should we handle this as part of our deployment process? One
option is to build one artifact per environment, with configuration inside the artifact
itself. Initially this seems sensible. The configuration is built right in; just deploy it
and everything should work fine, right? This is problematic. Remember the concept
of continuous delivery. We want to create an artifact that represents our release candi‐
date, and move it through our pipeline, confirming that it is good enough to go into
production. Let’s imagine I build a Customer-Service-Test and Customer-Service-
Prod artifacts. If my Customer-Service-Test artifact passes the tests, but it’s the
Customer-Service-Prod artifact that I actually deploy, can I be sure that I have veri‐
fied the software that actually ends up in production?
There are other challenges as well. First, there is the additional time taken to build
these artifacts. Next, the fact that you need to know at build time what environments
exist. And how do you handle sensitive configuration data? I don’t want information
about production passwords checked in with my source code, but if it is needed at
build time to create all those artifacts, this is often difficult to avoid.
A better approach is to create one single artifact, and manage configuration sepa‐
rately. This could be a properties file that exists for each environment, or different
parameters passed in to an install process. Another popular option, especially when
dealing with a larger number of microservices, is to use a dedicated system for pro‐
viding configuration, which we’ll explore more in Chapter 11.
Service Configuration 
| 
115

---

## Page 136

Service-to-Host Mapping
One of the questions that comes up quite early on in the discussion around microser‐
vices is “How many services per machine?” Before we go on, we should pick a better
term than machine, or even the more generic box that I used earlier. In this era of vir‐
tualization, the mapping between a single host running an operating system and the
underlying physical infrastructure can vary to a great extent. Thus, I tend to talk
about hosts, using them as a generic unit of isolation—namely, an operating system
onto which I can install and run my services. If you are deploying directly on to phys‐
ical machines, then one physical server maps to one host (which is perhaps not com‐
pletely correct terminology in this context, but in the absence of better terms may
have to suffice). If you’re using virtualization, a single physical machine can map to
multiple independent hosts, each of which could hold one or more services.
So when thinking of different deployment models, we’ll talk about hosts. So, then,
how many services per host should we have?
I have a definite view as to which model is preferable, but there are a number of fac‐
tors to consider when working out which model will be right for you. It’s also impor‐
tant to understand that some choices we make in this regard will limit some of the
deployment options available to us.
Multiple Services Per Host
Having multiple services per host, as shown in Figure 6-6, is attractive for a number
of reasons. First, purely from a host management point of view, it is simpler. In a
world where one team manages the infrastructure and another team manages the
software, the infrastructure team’s workload is often a function of the number of
hosts it has to manage. If more services are packed on to a single host, the host man‐
agement workload doesn’t increase as the number of services increases. Second is
cost. Even if you have access to a virtualization platform that allows you to provision
and resize virtual hosts, the virtualization can add an overhead that reduces the
underlying resources available to your services. In my opinion, both these problems
can be addressed with new working practices and technology, and we’ll explore that
shortly.
This model is also familiar to those who deploy into some form of an application con‐
tainer. In some ways, the use of an application container is a special case of the
multiple-services-per-host model, so we’ll look into that separately. This model can
also simplify the life of the developer. Deploying multiple services to a single host in
production is synonymous with deploying multiple services to a local dev worksta‐
tion or laptop. If we want to look at an alternative model, we want to find a way to
keep this conceptually simple for developers.
116 
| 
Chapter 6: Deployment

---

## Page 137

Figure 6-6. Multiple microservices per host
There are some challenges with this model, though. First, it can make monitoring
more difficult. For example, when tracking CPU, do I need to track the CPU of one
service independent of the others? Or do I care about the CPU of the box as a whole?
Side effects can also be hard to avoid. If one service is under significant load, it can
end up reducing the resources available to other parts of the system. Gilt, when scal‐
ing out the number of services it ran, hit this problem. Initially it coexisted many
services on a single box, but uneven load on one of the services would have an
adverse impact on everything else running on that host. This makes impact analysis
of host failures more complex as well—taking a single host out of commission can
have a large ripple effect.
Deployment of services can be somewhat more complex too, as ensuring one deploy‐
ment doesn’t affect another leads to additional headaches. For example, if I use Pup‐
pet to prepare a host, but each service has different (and potentially contradictory)
dependencies, how can I make that work? In the worst-case scenario, I have seen peo‐
ple tie multiple service deployments together, deploying multiple different services to
a single host in one step, to try to simplify the deployment of multiple services to one
host. In my opinion, the small upside in improving simplicity is more than out‐
weighed by the fact that we have given up one of the key benefits of microservices:
striving for independent release of our software. If you do adopt the multiple-
services-per-host model, make sure you keep hold of the idea that each service should
be deployed independently.
This model can also inhibit autonomy of teams. If services for different teams are
installed on the same host, who gets to configure the host for their services? In all
likelihood, this ends up getting handled by a centralized team, meaning it takes more
coordination to get services deployed.
Another issue is that this option can limit our deployment artifact options. Image-
based deployments are out, as are immutable servers unless you tie multiple different
services together in a single artifact, which we really want to avoid.
The fact that we have multiple services on a single host means that efforts to target
scaling to the service most in need of it can be complicated. Likewise, if one
Service-to-Host Mapping 
| 
117

---

## Page 138

microservice handles data and operations that are especially sensitive, we might want
to set up the underlying host differently, or perhaps even place the host itself in a sep‐
arate network segment. Having everything on one host means we might end up hav‐
ing to treat all services the same way even if their needs are different.
As my colleague Neal Ford puts it, many of our working practices around deploy‐
ment and host management are an attempt to optimize for scarcity of resources. In
the past, the only option if we wanted another host was to buy or rent another physi‐
cal machine. This often had a large lead time to it and resulted in a long-term finan‐
cial commitment. It wasn’t uncommon for clients I have worked with to provision
new servers only every two to three years, and trying to get additional machines out‐
side of these timelines was difficult. But on-demand computing platforms have dras‐
tically reduced the costs of computing resources, and improvements in virtualization
technology mean even for in-house hosted infrastructure there is more flexibility.
Application Containers
If you’re familiar with deploying .NET applications behind IIS or Java applications
into a servlet container, you will be well acquainted with the model where multiple
distinct services or applications sit inside a single application container, which in turn
sits on a single host, as we see in Figure 6-7. The idea is that the application container
your services live in gives you benefits in terms of improved manageability, such as
clustering support to handle grouping multiple instances together, monitoring tools,
and the like.
Figure 6-7. Multiple microservices per host
This setup can also yield benefits in terms of reducing overhead of language run‐
times. Consider running five Java services in a single Java servlet container. I only
have the overhead of one single JVM. Compare this with running five independent
JVMs on the same host when using embedded containers. That said, I still feel that
these application containers have enough downsides that you should challenge your‐
self to see if they are really required.
118 
| 
Chapter 6: Deployment

---

## Page 139

First among the downsides is that they inevitably constrain technology choice. You
have to buy into a technology stack. This can limit not only the technology choices
for the implementation of the service itself, but also the options you have in terms of
automation and management of your systems. As we’ll discuss shortly, one of the
ways we can address the overhead of managing multiple hosts is around automation,
and so constraining our options for resolving this may well be doubly damaging.
I would also question some of the value of the container features. Many of them tout
the ability to manage clusters to support shared in-memory session state, something
we absolutely want to avoid in any case due to the challenges this creates when scaling
our services. And the monitoring capabilities they provide won’t be sufficient when
we consider the sorts of joined-up monitoring we want to do in a microservices
world, as we’ll see in Chapter 8. Many of them also have quite slow spin-up times,
impacting developer feedback cycles.
There are other sets of problems too. Attempting to do proper lifecycle management
of applications on top of platforms like the JVM can be problematic, and more com‐
plex than simply restarting a JVM. Analyzing resource use and threads is also much
more complex, as you have multiple applications sharing the same process. And
remember, even if you do get value from a technology-specific container, they aren’t
free. Aside from the fact that many of them are commercial and so have a cost impli‐
cation, they add a resource overhead in and of themselves.
Ultimately, this approach is again an attempt to optimize for scarcity of resources that
simply may not hold up anymore. Whether you decide to have multiple services per
host as a deployment model, I would strongly suggest looking at self-contained
deployable microservices as artifacts. For .NET, this is possible with things like
Nancy, and Java has supported this model for years. For example, the venerable Jetty
embedded container makes for a very lightweight self-contained HTTP server, which
is the core of the Dropwizard stack. Google has been known to quite happily use
embedded Jetty containers for serving static content directly, so we know these things
can operate at scale.
Single Service Per Host
With a single-service-per-host model shown in Figure 6-8, we avoid side effects of
multiple hosts living on a single host, making monitoring and remediation much
simpler. We have potentially reduced our single points of failure. An outage to one
host should impact only a single service, although that isn’t always clear when you’re
using a virtualized platform. We’ll cover designing for scale and failure more in Chap‐
ter 11. We also can more easily scale one service independent from others, and deal
with security concerns more easily by focusing our attention only on the service and
host that requires it.
Service-to-Host Mapping 
| 
119

---

## Page 140

Figure 6-8. A single microservice per host
Just as important is that we have opened up the potential to use alternative deploy‐
ment techniques such as image-based deployments or the immutable server pattern,
which we discussed earlier.
We’ve added a lot of complexity in adopting a microservice architecture. The last
thing we want to do is go looking for more sources of complexity. In my opinion, if
you don’t have a viable PaaS available, then this model does a very good job of reduc‐
ing a system’s overall complexity. Having a single-service-per-host model is signifi‐
cantly easier to reason about and can help reduce complexity. If you can’t embrace
this model yet, I won’t say microservices aren’t for you. But I would suggest that you
look to move toward this model over time as a way of reducing the complexity that a
microservice architecture can bring.
Having an increased number of hosts has potential downsides, though. We have more
servers to manage, and there might also be a cost implication of running more dis‐
tinct hosts. Despite these problems, this is still the model I prefer for microservice
architectures. And we’ll talk about a few things we can do to reduce the overhead of
handling large numbers of hosts shortly.
Platform as a Service
When using a platform as a service (PaaS), you are working at a higher-level abstrac‐
tion than at a single host. Most of these platforms rely on taking a technology-specific
artifact, such as a Java WAR file or Ruby gem, and automatically provisioning and
running it for you. Some of these platforms will transparently attempt to handle scal‐
ing the system up and down for you, although a more common (and in my experi‐
ence less error-prone) way will allow you some control over how many nodes your
service might run on, but it handles the rest.
At the time of writing, most of the best, most polished PaaS solutions are hosted.
Heroku comes to mind as being probably the gold class of PaaS. It doesn’t just handle
running your service, it also supports services like databases in a very simple fashion.
120 
| 
Chapter 6: Deployment

---
