# 5. Practical.Event-Driven.Microservices.Architecture.Hugo.Filipe.Oliveira.Rocha.Apress.9781484274675.EBooksWorld.ir

> Extracted from: `5. Practical.Event-Driven.Microservices.Architecture.Hugo.Filipe.Oliveira.Rocha.Apress.9781484274675.EBooksWorld.ir.pdf` (pages 195-240)
> Total pages in PDF: 457

---

## Page 195

182
ones aren’t (similar as they would be in a single code solution). This encapsulation 
helps contain the dependencies and lowers the likelihood of breaking contracts. A good 
approach is often guaranteeing the boundary has exclusive ownership of its domain’s 
data and has clean dedicated endpoints that expose the boundaries’ functionalities.
Overall, having domain segregation and enforcing the separation of concerns 
between bounded contexts can be useful in containing the architecture’s complexity and 
a sustainable way to evolve the architecture without losing track of the high-level flow.
4.7.2  Context Maps
The patterns we discussed, like CQRS and event sourcing, aren’t applicable in every use 
case, but DDD and its techniques have essential benefits that we can often use. DDD 
highlights the need to understand the system’s domains and bounded contexts and their 
relationships. Its practices can often help us understand them even if we don’t apply the 
more complex patterns like CQRS.
Context maps are typically mentioned in DDD, and they describe the existing bounded 
contexts, their relationships, and interactions in the form of a diagram or simply text. They 
can depict the higher-level relationships, dependencies, and flow of messages between 
the different bounded contexts. They are often similar to the diagrams we have been using 
throughout the book; an example is depicted in Figure ­4-­21.
Chapter 4  Structural Patterns and Chaining Processes

---

## Page 196

183
This example also details the entities in each bounded context. Also, an interesting 
note is the product entity, which is present in several bounded contexts but might have 
different information on each, depending on what is relevant. We can start by only 
drawing out the relations between the bounded contexts and later add more information 
like domains and entities. The details about relationships and their dependencies are 
often described in text or in a table that follows the diagram.
6WRFNFKDQJHGHYHQWVWUHDP
2UGHUFUHDWHGHYHQWVWUHDP
2UGHUV
&XVWRPHUV
3URGXFWV
2UGHU%RXQGHG
&RQWH[W
3ULFLQJIHHV
FDOFXODWHGHYHQWVWUHDP
6XEPLWRUGHU
6WRFN
3URGXFWV
)HHV
&RXQWULHV
3URGXFWV
6KLSSLQJ
3URYLGHUV
2UGHUV
&XVWRPHUV
,QYHQWRU\%RXQGHG
&RQWH[W
3ULFLQJ%RXQGHG
&RQWH[W
6KLSSLQJ%RXQGHG
&RQWH[W
Figure 4-21.  Example of a possible context map for the eCommerce platform we 
have been discussing
Chapter 4  Structural Patterns and Chaining Processes

---

## Page 197

184
Context maps help to reason with the system, understand each boundary, and 
highlight where the boundaries share data. They also help to picture how the most 
important parts of the system relate to each other. In event-driven architectures, we can 
enrich the context map with the external event streams exposed and handled by the 
different bounded contexts. This approach can help provide a reference to reason and 
organize the architecture without losing track of the relationships between the services.
4.7.3  Distributed Tracing
In event-driven architectures, there is often no direct communication between services; 
this and the high decoupling between components can make the data flow hard to 
understand. Especially when using choreography, it is easy to lose the high-level flow of 
the events. Distributed tracing can be useful to tackle these challenges and help to map 
and understand these flows.
Distributed tracing collects and records services and operations that are in the scope 
of the events. That data can then be used to be searched and visualized. It can be a 
valuable method to reason with a distributed system, especially a highly decoupled one 
driven by events. It can also help to understand the relationships between the services.
Several tools can help us implement and record tracing. For example, we can use 
Zipkin along with Kafka’s interceptor API13 to record traces for every event produced 
and consumed. Another interesting example is using OpenTracing along with Jaeger.14 
OpenTracing can be used to add correlation data to the event’s headers and use them in 
Jaeger to have a high-level visualization.
Distributed tracing can be a valuable tool to visualize how services interact, the flow 
of the data, and a high-level perception of how architecture evolved throughout time. We 
can use that high-level view provided by distributed tracing to organize and reason with 
the architecture in a more sustainable way. We can’t improve what we don’t measure; if 
we have that information and if the architecture has a chaotic network of dependencies, 
we can use that information to design a strategy to organize and make sense of the 
architecture’s functionality.
13 Interesting article on how to implement it in Jorge Quilcate, “The Importance of Distributed 
Tracing for Apache Kafka Based Applications,” March 26, 2019, www.confluent.io/blog/
importance-of-distributed-tracing-for-apache-kafka-based-applications/
14 Interesting article on how to implement it in Aaron Burk, “Fault Tolerance in Distributed 
Systems: Tracing with Apache Kafka and Jaeger,” July 24, 2019, www.confluent.io/blog/
fault-tolerance-distributed-systems-tracing-with-apache-kafka-jaeger/
Chapter 4  Structural Patterns and Chaining Processes

---

## Page 198

185
4.8  Summary
•	
Transactional consistency is a complex challenge in distributed 
systems. Distributed transactions and two-phase commit protocols 
are an alternative, but a very limited one often raising more issues 
than it solves.
•	
Sagas are a sequence of individual operations to manage a long-­
running process. We can use them to divide a long-running or 
traditional single database transaction into smaller ones, being more 
suitable for a distributed environment. Two common patterns of 
implementing Sagas are orchestration and choreography.
•	
Orchestration uses a primary component to manage the steps of the 
process. It is often valuable in complex processes that need a central 
supervisor.
•	
Services using choreography react to each other to complete 
the Saga’s sequence of steps. Each service reacts to the changes 
happening in the ecosystem to accomplish its tasks. Choreography 
tends to be a typical pattern in event-driven architectures, and it 
synergizes well with its mindset.
•	
We can combine orchestration and choreography as we see fit. 
Choreography can be applied more commonly and in higher-level 
processes. We can use orchestration on a more limited scope and 
specific use cases.
•	
In event-driven architectures, having a set of independent services, 
each owning its domain’s data, can pose a challenge to getting an 
aggregated view of the data. API composition can be a possible 
solution, albeit a very limited one.
•	
We can apply CQRS to segregate writes from reads. This segregation 
allows an optimized model and approach for each. CQRS isn’t 
limited to segregating databases for reads and writes; there are other 
intermediate patterns that we can use.
Chapter 4  Structural Patterns and Chaining Processes

---

## Page 199

186
•	
Event sourcing is a valuable pattern that synergizes well with event-­
driven architectures. It is important to understand the concerns and 
advantages of event sourcing as they might be useful in some use 
cases but also produce some complex limitations.
•	
Command sourcing relates to event sourcing and can also be a useful 
pattern when it is essential to save the requests exactly as the user 
submitted them. As with event sourcing, it is important to weigh its 
benefits and apply it only when it outweighs its concerns.
•	
Documents and Kafka’s compacted topics can be a good approach to 
build several read models.
•	
Continuously adding more moving parts to the system can become 
hard to read and understand the overall picture. Domain segregation, 
clear boundaries, context maps, and distributed tracing can be 
valuable tools to tackle this challenge.
Chapter 4  Structural Patterns and Chaining Processes

---

## Page 200

187
© Hugo Filipe Oliveira Rocha 2022 
H. F. Oliveira Rocha, Practical Event-Driven Microservices Architecture,  
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-7468-2_5
CHAPTER 5
How to Manage Eventual 
Consistency
This chapter covers:
•	
Why eventual consistency is a consequence of event-driven systems 
and its impact on the business and consumers
•	
Using event schema to avoid eventual consistency
•	
Applying domain boundaries to manage eventual consistency
•	
Using event versioning as a mean to react to inconsistent information
•	
Applying the end-to-end principle to guarantee a consistent flow
•	
Appearing consistent by maintaining a small inconsistency window
The funny thing about consistency in software engineering is that the meaning is not 
very consistent. Puns aside, the definition of consistency varies from context to context, 
and there are several levels of strong and weak consistency. Strong consistency is the 
consistency we are usually used to and provided by the traditional ACID (atomicity, 
consistency, isolation, and durability) properties. There are several degrees of weak 
consistency1 that offer different levels of safety. Similar to what we would configure in a 
transaction isolation level, strong consistency would be the serializable level, while an 
example of weak consistency could be read uncommitted or read committed.
When dealing with distributed systems, there are several degrees of consistency, 
each with its peculiarities. I won’t detail each of them since it’s not in the scope of this 
1 Check this article by Jepsen which details the different degrees, “Consistency Models,”  
https://jepsen.io/consistency

---

## Page 201

188
book’s contents. Still, the duality between availability and strong consistency usually 
triggers a lively debate illustrated by the CAP theorem detailed in Section 5.1.
Typical monolithic applications enjoy the comfort of ACID properties and the 
traditional meaning of consistency. Transactional and relational databases usually treat 
data as a single copy; changes are atomic and instantaneous. If you change a record, 
you don’t have to worry about any concurrent write since the operation is atomic. No 
one else can modify it simultaneously, and it will be available to anyone reading it 
instantaneously. When you read that record, you are guaranteed to read the last possible 
value.
These kinds of guarantees are typically available on monolithic applications. 
They simplify most developments and provide an easy solution to otherwise complex 
problems. This meaning of consistency is the foundation for many applications and is 
wired into our minds and our customers’ minds while using the software. Looking back, 
this level of consistency is a warm fuzzy blanket on a dark cold night. When moving to 
an event-driven architecture, you most likely will need to leave that blanket behind and 
embrace the cold. Don’t worry, the cold is always better than the heat of a SQL database 
CPU running at 100%.
Interactions between components in an event-driven architecture are often with 
asynchronous communications. Traditionally, communications between microservices 
are point-to-point synchronous communications. Often microservices expose APIs 
so other services can use their functionality and access their data. As exemplified in 
Figure 5-1, these APIs usually use synchronous communication like REST, and service 
1 sends a request and obtains the response immediately. When using event-driven 
microservices, service 1 publishes an event which is handled by service 2, but no direct 
communication happens between the two services, and is always mediated through the 
event broker; the services don’t know each other.
Chapter 5  How to Manage Eventual Consistency

---

## Page 202

189
It is often preached about the advantages of decoupling components through 
message queues; while this is undoubtedly useful, it also has the consequence of making 
the propagation of changes in the system asynchronous. The asynchronous decoupling 
produces what is usually named eventual consistency; reads on different parts of the 
system might return stale data, but given enough time, all reads will eventually return the 
same value. In event-driven architectures, all services processing events for a given entity 
will eventually converge to the same state as soon as they process those events. Eventual 
consistency is a specific form of weak consistency since it doesn’t guarantee the stronger 
guarantees of ACID properties, for example. NoSQL databases have widely adopted 
eventual consistency as a means to enable high scalability and provide availability 
guarantees that are hard (or impossible) to achieve with strong consistency models in a 
distributed environment. Section 5.1 will further detail this topic and its relation to the 
CAP theorem.
6\QFURQRXVUHTXHVW
6HUYLFH
6HUYLFH
3XEOLVKHYHQW
6HUYLFH
6HUYLFH
&RQVXPHHYHQW
0HVVDJH
4XHXH
6\QFKURQRXV
FRPPXQLFDWLRQ
$V\QFKURQRXV
FRPPXQLFDWLRQ
6HUYLFHUHTXHVWV
LQIRUPDWLRQV\QFKURQRXVO\
HJXVLQJ+773
UHVSRQVHLVREWDLQHGDW
WKHHQGRIWKHUHTXHVW
6HUYLFH
SXEOLVKHVDILUH
DQGIRUJHWHYHQW
GRHVQ
WREWDLQWKH
UHVSRQVHIURP
6HUYLFH
Figure 5-1.  Comparison between synchronous and asynchronous microservice 
communication
Chapter 5  How to Manage Eventual Consistency

---

## Page 203

190
Having components that possibly return stale values impacts the system’s users and 
has an even higher impact on other services that depend on that information. When 
a service’s domain logic depends on information from an eventually consistent read 
model, it might produce erroneous results due to the stale information. It is fundamental 
to know how to handle eventual consistency to leverage these impacts.
This chapter provides several techniques to deal with and leverage eventual 
consistency in an event-driven architecture. In Section 5.2, you will learn how event 
schema design can avoid eventual consistency. The impacts of event schema design are 
further detailed in Chapter 8.
In Section 5.3, you will learn to use domain boundaries to contain the impacts of 
eventual consistency. This relates to the choreography pattern described in Chapter 4. 
Section 5.4 will detail how to use event versioning to detect stale information and use 
compensation strategies to deal with eventual consistency.
The end-to-end principle can guarantee consistency in the end-to-end flow while 
allowing eventual consistency on the system’s smaller components. This will be detailed 
in Section 5.5 and include a real-world example of its use. Section 5.6 will weigh eventual 
consistency with small inconsistency windows and show how real-world uses of NoSQL 
databases can apply it in production. You will learn how the same strategy can be 
applied to event-driven architectures.
5.1  The Impacts of Eventual Consistency and the 
Need for Alignment with the Business
In this section, you will learn the impacts of eventual consistency and understand that not 
every component needs or should be eventually consistent. There’s no magic solution to 
eventual consistency, just ways to leverage it. It should be a conscious decision to adopt 
it and needs alignment with the system’s business owners. There is also the need for a 
deliberate strategy to deal with your system’s future consumers and should be clear to 
them that the service might return stale data. This section will also detail and illustrate the 
impact of eventual consistency and teach you to weigh the tradeoffs.
Let’s illustrate eventual consistency with an example. Figure 5-2 depicts a user 
buying a product on an eCommerce platform based on a single application. At the 
moment of the purchase, the system would need to validate the available stock and 
create the order. The subscription service would also need to validate the remaining 
stock and notify interested parties if the product has just one stock unit left.
Chapter 5  How to Manage Eventual Consistency

---

## Page 204

191
Since there is only one application, each operation is synchronous. The logic and the 
domain flow of the order are sequential inside that application. The database changes 
can occur atomically, and the information about, for example, the product’s stock on 
the platform will be updated when the user orders the product. The new stock will be 
instantly visible to every user on the platform.
0RQROLWKLF$SS
'DWDEDVH
8VHU
2UGHU:RUNIORZ
0RGXOH
,QYHQWRU\0RGXOH
6XEVFULSWLRQ0RGXOH
5HSRVLWRU\
3UHVHQWDWLRQ
3UHVHQWDWLRQ/D\HU
$SSOLFDWLRQ/D\HU
'DWD/D\HU
8VHUDFFHVVLQJD
W\SLFDOPRQROLWKLF
DSSOLFDWLRQDOO
GLIIHUHQWPRGXOHVDUH
LQVLGHLW
Figure 5-2.  Monolithic application with several different modules
Chapter 5  How to Manage Eventual Consistency

---

## Page 205

192
Now let’s see the same example as before but with each module with an independent 
event-driven microservice as pictured in Figure 5-3. The order service would create the order 
and then publish an event informing about the operation. Inventory service would then handle 
that event and update the stock for that product. Since these two operations are asynchronous 
between the moment the user created the order and the moment the service updated the stock, 
there could be another order for the same product. Since the stock model wasn’t up to date yet, 
the user could view and order stock for that product. The stale data and the concurrency of the 
orders would produce a duplicate order for stock that might not be available.
(YHQWSXEOLVKHG
2UGHU6HUYLFH
8SGDWHVWRFN

3URFHVVVWRFNFKDQJHG
0HVVDJH
4XHXH

*HWVWRFN
,QYHQWRU\
6HUYLFH
8VHUFUHDWHVWKHRUGHU
8,$SSOLFDWLRQ
6XEVFULSWLRQ
6HUYLFH
8VHU
'%
'%
'%
$3,
0HVVDJH
4XHXH
$3,
'LIIHUHQWPRGXOHVDUH
GLIIHUHQWVHUYLFHVWKDW
FRPPXQLFDWHWKURXJK
HYHQWV
Figure 5-3.  Event-driven approach to the same application
Chapter 5  How to Manage Eventual Consistency

---

## Page 206

193
Distributed systems like event-driven architectures have two core properties2: safety 
and liveliness. These two properties provide the foundation to understand why eventual 
consistency is a challenge.
5.1.1  Safety
The safety property guarantees that no “bad things” happen in the system. Bad things 
are situations that could make the data invalid or to have a state that was never on the 
system (e.g., concurrency issues inside the system, possibility of deadlocks, unordered 
operations, etc.). Typical eventual consistency has no safety properties; however, in an 
event-driven system, we can avoid most of these issues. How to solve them is explored 
in Chapters 6, 7, and 8. An important consideration is while the system is inside the 
inconsistency window (the time between an update occurs and the change propagates 
throughout the system), the state returned can be invalid, which might be an issue 
depending on the use case. This chapter discusses possible solutions for these issues. If 
we model events to be small, the partial state of the entity we build through them might 
be temporarily invalid. For example, if you change your profile’s full address and the 
system processing it sends partial events for the street name and the city, the built model 
might have the new street name and the old city temporarily. Chapter 8 explores this 
subject in greater detail.
5.1.2  Liveliness
The liveliness property guarantees that “good things” happen in the system. In this 
context, the most important consequence is higher availability. Availability is one of the 
most useful advantages of event-driven microservices as they endow the system with 
higher resilience, enabling for higher percentages of the service’s availability.
The first most obvious consequence is for the users of the system. Changes by the 
system’s users might take time to propagate to every service in the ecosystem, impacting 
the tools. I’m guessing you probably used an application that after doing an update took 
a few refreshes of the page to see those changes reflected. Although it is a dubious user 
experience and mildly infuriating, it might be acceptable to live with depending on the 
2 These two properties were first described in this article by Bowen Alpern and Fred B. Schneider, 
“Defining Liveness,” October 7, 1985
Chapter 5  How to Manage Eventual Consistency

---

## Page 207

194
business. There might also be the case that it is better not to be available than displaying 
stale information. The most crucial property in this situation is the length of the 
inconsistency window; if it is small enough, it won’t be noticeable, and as far as users are 
concerned, fast eventually consistency is strong consistency as explored in Section 5.6. 
There are also ways to design UIs to be more compatible with asynchronous systems, as 
will be discussed in Chapter 9.
When there is business-critical functionality built on top of eventual consistency, 
you need to weigh whether forfeiting consistency in favor of availability is acceptable 
to the business. There might be use cases where not accessing the data is preferable to 
base decisions on stale information. We saw this firsthand on a system that managed 
an eCommerce platform products’ visibility. The business had several agreements with 
brands to not allow certain categories of products to be available in specific regions. 
The punctual delays in the UIs due to peaks in load made the business completely stop 
using that feature to manage it in more error-prone manual alternatives because they 
simply couldn’t trust the system. This example highlights the need to understand the 
functionality’s criticality and to weigh if another solution is preferable.
The issue also gains a different magnitude in synchronous HTTP calls between 
services. The example in Figure 5-3 illustrates this issue; the UI application does an 
HTTP call to the inventory service API to obtain the stock after creating the order to 
validate if there is just only one stock unit left to notify customers. The stock returned 
by the inventory service might not be up to date since both the subscription service and 
inventory service are processing it. The stale data might result in two possible faults if the 
subscription service processes the order created event faster than the inventory service:
•	
The stock quantity is two, resulting in no notification sent since it 
wasn’t the last stock unit.
•	
The stock quantity is one, resulting in the service sending a repeated 
notification for a stock quantity no longer available.
When a service has domain logic that depends on synchronous data from a different 
service, this issue will always have a chance to happen even if the inconsistency window 
is small. A peak in the service load might cause it to lag, producing stale responses for 
every dependent service.
In this case, living with eventual consistency won’t be enough, and we require more 
deliberate strategies that are discussed further in the next chapters.
Chapter 5  How to Manage Eventual Consistency

---

## Page 208

195
5.1.3  The CAP Theorem in the Real World
This subsection will detail further the impacts of eventual consistency and how they 
relate to the CAP theorem. Eventual consistency has been highly debated in the context 
of the CAP theorem as a means to justify its presence on event-driven architectures. By 
learning its meaning and real-world impacts on real production databases that deal with 
the same challenges, you will be able to understand the tradeoffs between availability 
and consistency, as pictured in Figure 5-4.
Distributed databases with high-availability requirements typically provide several 
copies of the original data in different nodes in geographically separated locations. 
This feature allows the system to maintain the data’s integrity even when a node is 
lost and enjoy lower network latency for clients close to those geographical locations. 
However, the system has to copy the data to different nodes; the replication doesn’t 
occur instantaneously and might produce inconsistent results across other nodes; one 
update that happened in one node might not yet be available for a read on a different 
node. Maintaining a consistent response from several nodes is even more hampered by 
network faults, typically known as network partitions. When a network partition occurs 
(due to, for example, failure in a hardware component), it can split the cluster’s nodes 
into smaller groups that cannot communicate with each other; changes in one group’s 
data will be invisible to the other and vice versa. The question arises on what strategy 
to choose, to either wait out the fault in the network and thus be unavailable or return a 
possible less consistent version of the data allowing the system to respond to requests.
1HWZRUN
3DUWLWLRQV
$YDLODELOLW\
&RQVLVWHQF\
&$37KHRUHP
Figure 5-4.  CAP theorem and the duality between consistency and 
availability
Chapter 5  How to Manage Eventual Consistency

---

## Page 209

196
This dilemma is illustrated by the CAP theorem, which appeared in 2000 by a 
keynote3 presented by Dr. Eric Brewer and greatly influenced how engineers design 
distributed storage systems since that time. It laid the foundations for many NoSQL 
databases that appeared and evolved since then and contributed to the general 
acceptance of weak consistency models. The reasoning behind adopting an AP 
(available and tolerant to network partitions) data store is very similar to the logic to 
adopt an asynchronous event-driven solution and lays out the fundamentals of why 
eventual consistency is needed. Also, the properties raised by the CAP theorem are 
unavoidable in any distributed system.
The CAP theorem is based on three properties: consistency, availability, and 
tolerance of network partitions. It states that a distributed system can either be available 
or consistent in the presence of network partitions. It is not possible to choose two 
properties out of the three since network partitions are inevitable on a distributed 
system; instead, you have to decide whether availability or consistency prevails. Let’s dig 
down on those three properties:
•	
Consistency: The word consistency is broad and usually is the source 
of misunderstandings; in the scope of the CAP theorem, it means 
linearizability (differs from the consistency in ACID4). It guarantees 
that any single operation like a read or write on an entity occurs in 
real time, similar to what would happen if there was just one copy of 
the data. For example, if there are two updates on an object after one 
node returns the latest update, all nodes must return that update as 
well. It seems simple but in the context of distributed computing is a 
challenging problem to solve.
•	
Availability: The system is available 100% of the time, in the scope of 
network partitions. An important detail of this definition is that there 
is no limit to latency.5 A response is considered available even if it 
takes several days to return, for theoretical purposes is fitting, but for 
a realistic view of the real world is counter-intuitive.
3 See Dr. Eric A. Brewer, “Towards Robust Distributed Systems,” July 19, 2000, https://people.
eecs.berkeley.edu/~brewer/cs262b-2004/PODC-keynote.pdf
4 Further details in “CAP Twelve Years Later: How the “Rules” Have Changed,” May 30, 2012,  
www.infoq.com/articles/cap-twelve-years-later-how-the-rules-have-changed/
5 See Martin Kleppmann, “A Critique of the CAP Theorem,” September 18, 2015, https://arxiv.
org/pdf/1509.05393.pdf
Chapter 5  How to Manage Eventual Consistency

---

## Page 210

197
•	
Tolerance to network partitions: A network partition occurs when the 
connectivity between two nodes gets interrupted and are unable to 
communicate. Network partitions can happen due to various reasons 
like failures in network hardware.
This definition splits distributed systems into two groups AP or CP, by either 
choosing availability or consistency. Due to the demanding availability requirements of 
Internet applications, we often see AP distributed systems as a necessary consequence 
of the high volume of current applications’ data. AP systems typically use eventual 
consistency as a means to be both available and tolerant to network partitions. Eventual 
consistency is also a natural consequence of the asynchronous nature of event-driven 
systems and nowadays is an accepted characteristic of most event-driven solutions. But 
should it be so lightly accepted?
The CAP theorem’s availability isn’t the operational availability we are used to but 
limited to the scope of network-related problems. Usually, we define availability as the 
ability of a system to respond to requests successfully. In the CAP theorem, the definition is 
more blurred than that. It refers to the availability of the theorem’s algorithm6 that is closely 
related to faults in the network. That means 100% availability in the CAP context doesn’t 
guarantee 100% overall availability. Several failures can jeopardize the system’s availability 
besides network-related problems like wrong configurations, bugs on the application code, 
limited resources, etc. But what does that mean in real use cases? Google revealed that its 
Google Spanner database of all the incidents occurred only 7.6% were due to the network, 
and more than half were due to human-related7 issues like misconfigurations.
In practice, the difference in availability between CP and AP systems isn’t as significant 
as we are led to believe; both systems can guarantee availability levels in the 99.999%; 
for example, Facebook’s HBase8 CP system also reached similar levels of availability. 
6 See Martin Kleppmann, “A Critique of the CAP Theorem,” September 18, 2015, https://arxiv.
org/pdf/1509.05393.pdf
7 Full article in Eric Brewer, “Spanner, TrueTime & The CAP Theorem,” February 14, 2017, 
https://static.googleusercontent.com/media/research.google.com/en//pubs/
archive/45855.pdf
8 Full article in Rishit Shroff and Zelaine Fong, “HydraBase – The evolution of HBase@Facebook,” 
 June 5, 2014, https://engineering.fb.com/2014/06/05/core-data/
hydrabase-the-evolution-of-hbase-facebook/
Chapter 5  How to Manage Eventual Consistency

---

## Page 211

198
The limited meaning of the CAP theorem’s availability raises the question of whether 
it supports a sufficiently compelling case to adopt AP systems at the expense of 
consistency. This question has been raised more and more9 often due to the impacts of 
the loss of consistency in solution design.
It is undeniable that network partitions are an unavoidable concern10 and have a 
considerable effect in any distributed system; however, we should question if it is reason 
enough to blindly embrace weaker consistency models like eventual consistency.
Traditional monolith applications typically enjoyed ACID guarantees that we 
took for granted. Consistency was the very foundation of software and was imbued in 
our way of thinking and interacting with a system or database. Arguably, consistency 
should be handled at the database level; not doing so is pushing the responsibility and 
a significant increment of complexity to every client using that system. The question of 
whether to adopt a CP or AP system and the impact of availability in the CAP theorem’s 
scope illustrates the same ramifications whether we should apply an event-driven 
architecture to a given system. The inherent asynchronous nature of event-driven 
systems can and most likely will produce eventually consistent models. This nature 
will push the complexity to handle inconsistent results to every client using that system 
similarly as AP systems do. It impacts the users and other applications that interact 
with the system since they will have to manage the possibility of inconsistent responses 
leading to complex and intricate solutions to dubious user experiences or convoluted 
business processes. Before turning business functionality eventually consistent, we 
should question whether the business can effectively live with it. Either way, there are 
approaches we can take to minimize its impact, as we will discuss in this chapter.
9 See Robert Yokota, “Don’t settle for eventual consistency,” February 17, 2017, https://
yokota.blog/2017/02/17/dont-settle-for-eventual-consistency/#fn-517-10, and Ben 
Darnell, “The Limits of the CAP Theorem,” June 27, 2017, www.cockroachlabs.com/blog/
limits-of-the-cap-theorem/
10 Further details in “The network is reliable,” June 2, 2013, https://aphyr.com/posts/288-the-­
network-is-reliable&ved=2ahUKEwjY7sjEvKfsAhVOcBQKHf78AxIQFjAEegQIAxAB&usg=AOvVaw3
159NbJwFhJotfpzh8iCBR&cshid=1602245361376
Chapter 5  How to Manage Eventual Consistency

---

## Page 212

199
5.2  Using Event Schema in Event-Driven 
Microservices to Leverage Eventual Consistency
In this section, you will learn how event schema can avoid eventual consistency on 
downstream consumers of events. Adapting event schema to your consumers’ needs 
and real use cases is often more useful than following a strict guideline on how to design 
event schema. This section will illustrate with an example and discuss two different 
approaches to schema design.
In Section 5.1, we used an example of a user buying a product on an eCommerce 
platform. Let’s drill down on the inventory and subscription service. Since most 
inventory management systems require audit on stock movements, they are often a 
typical use case to apply event sourcing. As discussed in Chapter 4, event sourcing can 
be paired with CQRS to allow more flexible reads. Figure 5-5 depicts inventory service 
with CQRS and its relation to the subscription service.
Chapter 5  How to Manage Eventual Consistency

---

## Page 213

200
Having the read and write model decoupled by a message queue makes the read 
model eventually consistent. The system will apply changes in the stock first to the write 
model, which is also the owner of the inventory domain logic. If the change complies 
(YHQWSXEOLVKHG
2UGHU6HUYLFH
8SGDWHVWRFN

3URFHVV6WRFN3XUFKDVHG
0HVVDJH
4XHXH
3XEOLVK6WRFN3XUFKDVHG
,QYHQWRU\:ULWH
0RGHO
8VHUFUHDWHVWKHRUGHU
8,$SSOLFDWLRQ

*HWSURGXFWVWRFN
6XEVFULSWLRQ
6HUYLFH
8VHU
'%
'%
'%
8SGDWHUHDGPRGHOVWRFN
0HVVDJH
4XHXH
'%
,QYHQWRU\5HDG
0RGHO
$3,
$3,
6XEVFULSWLRQVHUYLFHUHDFWVWR
WKHHYHQWE\PDNLQJD
V\QFKURQRXVUHTXHVW
Figure 5-5.  Event-driven approach mixing a synchronous request
Chapter 5  How to Manage Eventual Consistency

---

## Page 214

201
with the domain rules, the service will apply the change, and an event will be published, 
signaling the change in stock. All interested parties can consume that event and do what 
their domain needs to do with that information.
A common best practice is to design events to be small and fine-grained. Fine-­
grained events have many advantages; performance-wise, it’s faster to handle small 
events than large ones, serialization and deserialization are quicker and lightweight, and 
they have less impact on the message broker. It is also a common best practice to design 
events to reflect the user’s intent when using a DDD approach (domain-driven design; 
refer to Chapter 3 for more details). This way, the events and commands will have 
domain value and highlight the business flow throughout the architecture.
Applying these concepts to the example of Figure 5-3, we would model the stock 
changed event to be small and fine-grained and reflect the user’s intent. Typically, stock 
changes occur at the product’s stock-keeping unit level; for example, if the user was 
buying a shirt, it would be of a given size like XS. A possible event for this situation would 
look like Listing 5-1.
Listing 5-1.  StockPurchased event
1    StockPurchased   #A
2    {
3        ProductId: 15251212,
4        Size: "XS",
5        Quantity: 1
6    }
#A Stock purchased event with minimal information
This event reflects the intent of the user; the user bought one product of size XS. It 
also is fine-grained and only has minimal information needed. Usually, these kinds of 
events are the easiest to publish due to all the required information being available in 
the publishing service at the moment of the change; the service has no additional effort 
to create the event.
Let’s now discuss how the subscription service would consume this event. The 
subscription service needs to alert every user that subscribed to the alert of the product’s 
last available stock unit. As seen earlier, the event only provides the quantity that the 
user bought of that size. And here lies the challenge of the subscription service domain 
logic; from that event, the service has no way to know the total quantity of the product. 
Chapter 5  How to Manage Eventual Consistency

---

## Page 215

202
A product has several sizes, for example, they can range from XXS to XXL; the event’s 
quantity is only referring to that specific size. The event also only provides the quantity 
that the user bought, not the size’s current quantity.
A developer who needs to implement this functionality in the subscription service 
would probably fetch the current stock quantity for that product through the inventory 
service API. But since the inventory service read model is eventually consistent, it 
might return stale data. Since the inventory read model and the subscription service are 
consuming the same event in parallel, they will consume it at different rates. The event 
the subscription service is consuming might not be reflected in the read model at the 
time of the request. When the inventory read model returns stale data, the subscription 
service will incur in one of the two faults described in Section 5.1.
This logic is in line with the reasoning of NoSQL databases adopting eventual 
consistency and delegating the complexity of achieving strong consistency to the 
applications that use them explained in Subsection 5.1. In this case, the choice of 
fine-grained schema on inventory service delegates the complexity of handling stale 
information to the consumers. If we deal with this only on subscription service, it 
will add significant complexity to the service to solve a purely technical and not 
business-­related issue.
Most resources advise to create small fine-coursed events, mostly due to 
performance and other considerations. However, in the real world, what most teams find 
out is as the microservice ecosystem grows, so this concern becomes more pressing. One 
highly beneficial approach is to approach it by designing event schema with consumers’ 
needs in mind.
Going back to the inventory and subscription service example as seen in Figure 5-3, 
since inventory service has the stock information for all sizes, it would be arguably easy 
to send an event with additional details, illustrated in Listing 5-2.
Listing 5-2.  StockPurchased event denormalized
1    StockPurchased  #A
2    {
3        ProductId: 15251212,
4        Size: "XS",
5        Quantity: 1,
6        ProductCurrentQuantity: 5,
7        ProductSizes:[
Chapter 5  How to Manage Eventual Consistency

---

## Page 216

203
8            {
9                Size: "S",
10               Quantity: 3
11           },
12           {
13               Size: "M",
14               Quantity: 2
15           },
16       ]
17   }
#A Stock purchased event with information adapted to the consumer needs
The property indicating the product’s current stock information for every size would 
greatly ease the implementation in subscription service because it would be able to 
know the product’s total stock instead of a single size. Instead of requesting the current 
stock information from an eventually consistent model, the service would process its 
domain logic by relying solely on the event’s data. Besides removing a great deal of 
complexity from the subscription service, this approach also gives it a performance 
boost since it avoids the need for a network request.
Adding additional information to the event is a good strategy when the information 
is available but depends on the inventory service design. The aggregate size becomes a 
pivotal decision in this situation:
•	
If we design the aggregate in the inventory service to be the product, 
it would be trivial to obtain the total product’s stock.
•	
If we design the aggregate in the inventory service to be the product’s 
size, it would require a more complex solution. Since the product 
stock comprises each size’s stock information, we would require 
interaction between several aggregates. To obtain this information, 
we would need to apply a more complicated solution like a process 
manager. We further detail this topic in Chapter 8.
Adapting the event schema to consumer applications’ needs can be one of the 
most powerful patterns you can use to avoid eventual consistency. It easily contains the 
complexity of the architecture and the applications while retaining the advantages of 
event-driven systems.
Chapter 5  How to Manage Eventual Consistency

---

## Page 217

204
The full implications and additional alternatives to event schema are also discussed 
further in Chapter 8.
5.3  Applying Microservice Domain Boundaries 
to Leverage Eventual Consistency
In this section, you will learn to contain the impact of eventual consistency by 
segregating the services into domain boundaries. Bounded contexts are a core concept 
in DDD and you can use the same rationale to an event-driven architecture, especially 
when the system starts to have a high number of components. Using a boundary 
organization enhances the autonomy of the teams working in those components and 
can contain the impact of eventually consistent models. This section will detail how 
domain segregation can control that impact, illustrating it with an example.
In the last section, you learned how to solve the challenge of fetching stale data 
from an eventually consistent read model by adapting the event schema. We can use 
additional options to solve the need to fetch additional data; using the same example 
we used before with a user buying a product on an eCommerce platform, we can simply 
have the subscription service consume an event after the read model is updated. By 
changing the sequence of consumers between the services, we guarantee that the model 
is up to date with the event’s information, illustrated in Figure 5-6.
Chapter 5  How to Manage Eventual Consistency

---

## Page 218

205
8SGDWHVWRFN
0HVVDJH
4XHXH
3XEOLVKVWRFNSXUFKDVHG
,QYHQWRU\:ULWH
0RGHO
*HWSURGXFWVWRFN
6XEVFULSWLRQ
6HUYLFH
'%
'%
8SGDWHUHDGPRGHOVWRFN
0HVVDJH
4XHXH
'%
,QYHQWRU\5HDG
0RGHO
$3,
2UGHUFUHDWHGHYHQW
3URFHVVVWRFNFKDQJHG
0HVVDJH
4XHXH
3XEOLVKVWRFNFKDQJHGHYHQW
6XEVFULSWLRQ
VHUYLFHRQO\
UHDFWVWRWKH
HYHQWDIWHU
WKHFKDQJH
LVUHIOHFWHG
Figure 5-6.  Subscription service processing the change only after it is reflected on 
inventory read model
Chapter 5  How to Manage Eventual Consistency

---

## Page 219

206
This approach also solves possible inconsistency issues by informing the user too 
early if the subscription service would notify the user with a link to the product. If the 
user accesses it while inside the inconsistency window, the user would see incorrect 
stock. Changing the sequence of components, the subscription service would only notify 
the user when the data is updated.
However, this solution has some pitfalls:
•	
It is fairly debatable whether a read model should send an event. 
If we look at it in purely DDD terms, only a change in an aggregate 
should trigger an event; in this case, the only event that should be 
published would be from the write model that is the owner of the 
domain. It is arguably justifiable if it is not an event just a notification 
that the read model is up to date. However, it usually is a sign 
that something is out of place (in this case, we should avoid the 
synchronous call).
•	
You should use this approach sparingly and inside a specific context. 
Using it often will rapidly increase the complexity of the overall 
architecture and the flow of the information. The architecture 
should have clear boundaries and manage these issues inside 
each boundary. The data should flow between the boundaries and 
not have a tangled flow between the read models and the domain 
owners.
•	
The overall time to reflect the change throughout the system will 
increase.
In DDD, a bounded context is the contextual relationship of a specific domain 
model. It usually represents a subset of the domain of the overall system with its 
individual domain model. It’s also segregated from other bounded contexts with clear 
boundaries between them. Although the bounded context refers exclusively to the 
domain model, in a microservice event-driven architecture, one bounded context can 
span various individual components. For example, when applying CQRS, we can have 
one component responsible for the write model and another component responsible for 
the read model. They both use and represent the same domain, so the two components 
are part of the same bounded context.
Chapter 5  How to Manage Eventual Consistency

---

## Page 220

207
In a growing microservice architecture, it’s important to understand the system’s 
bounded contexts and which services belong to each one of them. Having clear domain 
boundaries between slices of the system will facilitate the evolution of the business. The 
decoupling between boundaries is the stepping stone to the seamless business evolution 
and limiting the technical impacts of that evolution. We detailed DDD and domain 
boundaries on an event-driven architecture in Chapter 3.
An alternative solution for this problem could be defining two separate boundaries, 
one for the inventory domain and another for the subscription domain. This separation 
has high synergy with a DDD approach, forcing you to understand the business and 
think about what kind of boundaries make sense and where to draw the boundaries. 
The business process is the flow between all needed domain boundaries. This is similar 
to the event choreography pattern detailed in Chapter 4. The anti-corruption layers 
guarantee that concepts from a given domain don’t leak to another domain. Chapter 3 
details this concept. We illustrate this solution in Figure 5-7.
Chapter 5  How to Manage Eventual Consistency

---

## Page 221

208
This solution is a more structured way to evolve the domains without losing track 
of the overall flow. The order created event is forwarded inside the boundary by the 
anti-corruption layer that adapts the event to keep only the needed information for that 
boundary. Inside the boundary, the inventory services will process the event accordingly 
with their logic. The write model will change the aggregate’s stock and publish an 
internal event. The read model will use the internal event to update its information  
and publish an external event only when the data is reflected in the read model.  
6XEVFULSWLRQ
'RPDLQ
%RXQGDU\
,QYHQWRU\
'RPDLQ
%RXQGDU\
2UGHUFUHDWHGHYHQW
0HVVDJH
4XHXH
3XEOLVKVWRFNSXUFKDVHG
,QYHQWRU\:ULWH
0RGHO
'%
8SGDWHUHDGPRGHOVWRFN
0HVVDJH
4XHXH
'%
,QYHQWRU\5HDG
0RGHO
$GDSWWRLQWHUQDOPHVVDJH
$QWL&RUUXSWLRQ/D\HU
8SGDWHVWRFN
0HVVDJH
4XHXH
0HVVDJH
4XHXH
$GDSWWRLQWHUQDOPHVVDJH
$QWL&RUUXSWLRQ/D\HU
6XEVFULSWLRQ
6HUYLFH
'%
3XEOLVKH[WHUQDOPHVVDJH
3URFHVVVWRFNFKDQJHG
0HVVDJH
4XHXH
([WHUQDO0HVVDJHV
,QWHUQDO0HVVDJHV
*HWSURGXFW
VVWRFN
$3,
7KHVHJUHJDWHGERXQGDU\IRU
LQYHQWRU\GRPDLQHQDEOHVWR
FRQWUROZKHQWRLQIRUPWKHGDWD
ZDVUHIOHFWHGWRWKHH[WHUQDO
ERXQGDULHV
Figure 5-7.  Applying domain boundaries to the same use case
Chapter 5  How to Manage Eventual Consistency

---

## Page 222

209
The complexity inside the inventory boundary is abstracted from external boundaries, 
like the subscription boundary, and can evolve as needed without impacting other 
boundaries.
Each domain can change; we can add or remove more components, but the business 
process’s overall flow will remain the same. We also deal with eventual consistency 
inside the boundary; changes that happen are notified to external consumers only 
when all the services inside the boundary processed it. This feature contains eventual 
consistency for external consumers; this way, we can guarantee the change the 
consumer is reacting to is already propagated inside the domain.
5.4  Handling Eventual Consistency Delays 
with Event Versioning
In this section, you will learn how to use event versioning to understand delayed 
responses and possible actions to mitigate its impacts. The most direct approach to 
eventual consistency is simply to try the operation later when it is no longer eventual. 
This solution is very straightforward and would probably be the most obvious alternative 
to deal with temporarily stale data. However, it has two not so obvious caveats: knowing 
the data is not up to date and when you should use it. We will illustrate this solution with 
an example and discuss possible approaches to avoid these caveats.
There is a fascinating article11 named “The Tail at Scale” from Jeffrey Dean and Luiz 
André Barroso detailing how Google managed to obtain 99.9% latency SLA on some 
of their services by optimizing the slowest requests on the 95th percentile. Distributed 
systems typically have latency fluctuations beyond the scope of the service. In a perfect 
world, we would avoid those fluctuations entirely, but these fluctuations are unavoidable 
in a complex distributed system, much like the fault-tolerant techniques we often 
employ. The article details several tail-tolerant methods to minimize or mask the impact 
of these temporary latency spikes. Some of them rely on retrying requests to the replicas 
when the original request takes longer than a specified time. The retrying strategy has a 
higher resource consumption due to the additional requests, which, the article explains, 
can be as low as just 2% with the right approach.
11 Full article in Jeffrey Dean and Luiz André Barroso, “The Tail at Scale,” February 2013,  
https://cacm.acm.org/magazines/2013/2/160173-the-tail-at-scale/fulltext
Chapter 5  How to Manage Eventual Consistency

---

## Page 223

210
We can draw an analogy from this article to retrying strategies in an event-driven 
architecture. Event-driven services should keep up with the message load and not lag 
behind the changes that occur in the system (as discussed in Section 5.7). However, the 
services will likely lag eventually one time or another due to unforeseen peaks in load, 
but that should be the exception rather than the rule; it should be the curve’s tail. If 
this is in fact the case, we can argue that we can opt for an optimistic approach; we can 
assume there isn’t eventual consistency. When a request fetches stale data, it can react to 
it with a retry.
Using the same example with the inventory and subscription service, when requesting 
the information to the inventory service if the data is stale, the service should make an 
additional request after a predefined amount of time. However, this assumes that the 
inventory service is faster and is usually up to date; the retry would be the exception.
The first caveat is how to know the data is stale. To solve that, we can use event 
versioning; each event should have a version (it is also essential to manage idempotency 
detailed in Chapter 7) that identifies the entity’s version. In DDD terms, it could be 
the aggregate version; for every change that happens on the aggregate, the service 
increments the version. It can also be a timestamp, which is more practical, although not 
sequential. This version should also be available on the API; the subscription service, 
when making the request, would compare both versions; if the version of the event were 
higher than the version of the API, the service would need to retry the request. This 
means the service didn’t reflect the change in the event on the read model yet.
Retrying the requests is the most straightforward strategy you can do but is also 
riskier. We often hear how retrying strategies can improve resilience, however, more 
often than not it sets the system up for failure. We can apply it only in less critical 
components or as a quick bandage. The consequence is that the service is considerably 
more susceptible to its dependencies’ load peaks. The implementation should have a 
circuit breaker and a backoff strategy. Used throughout, the architecture will make the 
system brittle and vulnerable to cascading failures. Retrying is the symptom of the lack of 
a more sustainable approach; we should use it wisely and sparingly.
There is also the issue of what to do when all retries fail. I saw some services that simply 
failed the message processing or delegated the failure to a business process, like a manual 
operation. Although they might be acceptable in some contexts (e.g., some less critical use 
cases like logging), I find these kinds of approaches disheartening and half-­hearted. There 
are some compensation alternatives like scheduling the handling of the failure to a later 
date; ultimately, consistency is well, eventual, so at some point in time, the lag will clear.
Chapter 5  How to Manage Eventual Consistency

---

## Page 224

211
Ordering is also an important consideration; retries make sense when message 
consumption is associative, commutative, and idempotent. Otherwise, the service might 
not be able to retry with consistent results. For more details, refer to Chapter 6.
Event versioning isn’t a definite solution on its own, just a tool that we can use to 
manage delays. We should apply it as a tactical solution for an urgent matter; more often 
than not, we require a more sustainable and reliable solution like the others mentioned 
in this chapter.
5.5  Saving State in Event-Driven Microservices 
to Avoid Eventual Consistency
In this section, you will learn how to prevent eventual consistency by storing state 
external to the service. Typically, microservices are faced with eventual consistency due 
to the hybrid nature of most real-world architectures. Some services react to events, and 
others make synchronous calls depending on the use case. By storing state, we can spare 
the synchronous call, avoiding dealing with an eventually consistent model.
Using the same example with the inventory and subscription service. depicted in 
Figure 5-5, the issue with eventual consistency rises due to the synchronous call between 
the subscription service and the inventory read model. To avoid doing the synchronous 
call, we could store the product’s stock internally in the subscription service. When the 
subscription service needs the stock information for all product sizes, it could fetch it 
locally, as in Figure 5-8.
Chapter 5  How to Manage Eventual Consistency

---

## Page 225

212
This approach is the most adherent to the event-driven mindset. By removing the 
synchronous request, the service becomes entirely decoupled from the dependency. 
It becomes more resilient since it won’t be affected if the inventory read model is 
unavailable. Performance-wise is also better since fetching the database’s data is often 
faster than a remote network call. Similarly to the solution adapting event schema, the 
subscription service is only dependent on the upstream inventory events.
However, the subscription service must maintain and internally store all the 
inventory information. When there is a large amount of data, storing it will impact the 
infrastructure and its costs. The subscription service will also need to maintain that data 
up to date, which has a considerable development overhead than just requesting the 
inventory read model data.
This approach gives precedence to the service’s autonomy and performance. It is a 
useful alternative to solve this kind of challenge; however, we must avoid the pitfall of 
applying it blindly in every use case. Otherwise, several copies of the service’s data will 
spread throughout the architecture, becoming hard to manage and maintain. We discuss 
further the tradeoffs of using events to provide state transfer in Chapter 8.

3URFHVV6WRFN3XUFKDVHG
3XEOLVK6WRFN3XUFKDVHG
,QYHQWRU\:ULWH
0RGHO
)HWFKVWRFNLQIRUPDWLRQ
6XEVFULSWLRQ6HUYLFH
8SGDWHUHDGPRGHOVWRFN
0HVVDJH
4XHXH
,QYHQWRU\5HDG
0RGHO
$3,
'%
'%
'%
6XEVFULSWLRQ
VHUYLFHVDYHVD
YLHZRIWKH
LQYHQWRU\GDWD
Figure 5-8.  Storing external state to avoid the synchronous request
Chapter 5  How to Manage Eventual Consistency

---

## Page 226

213
5.5.1  Buffering State As an Alternative to Persistence
We discussed how storing state could avoid the dependency of synchronous requests to 
an eventually consistent model. We also discussed the drawbacks of storing that data. An 
alternative to persisting the state is buffering it to memory. Storing every external state 
a service needs as an internal view of that state can be difficult to manage, to initialize, 
and to maintain up to date. An alternative to persisting the state is to load it in memory. 
There are two strategies to achieve this:
•	
A predefined buffering window: The service keeps in memory all 
events that arrive inside that window’s timespan. This strategy is 
relevant when a use case applies a batch of operations to the same 
or related entities in a small time frame, for example, bulk actions or 
uploads of information. If the service needs the data from the entity 
it is processing or a related entity, it can load directly from that buffer. 
This strategy’s success is directly related to the timespan’s size and 
the likelihood of the entity changing in that timespan. There’s always 
the chance the service doesn’t find the needed entity in memory and 
might have to fall back to a request, thus being limited to specific 
use cases. This strategy is also useful in data-intensive applications 
that write to data stores. Usually, a bulk change is faster than several 
single changes; the buffer can help cluster changes and update them 
on a single operation.
•	
Loading the full state: The service can load all the dependent states 
to memory. This solution implies all the event streams are available 
on the event broker. The service can read all the information from 
the beginning of the topic and keep it in memory. Other events 
would keep the in-memory view up to date. This strategy is only 
relevant to small data sets that aren’t expected to grow in the future. 
For example, if the subscription service would alert users only for 
products in the “shoes” category, it might need the product’s category 
information. Assuming there won’t be more than a few hundred 
categories in the platform, the service could load them to memory 
and use that view when needed. The service needs to load all the 
information on startup, which can be too cumbersome in large  
data sets.
Chapter 5  How to Manage Eventual Consistency

---

## Page 227

214
Figure 5-9 illustrates this solution applied to the same example using the subscription 
and inventory service. The subscription service loads the events in memory and, instead of 
making the synchronous request to the inventory read model, uses that information. This 
way, the service can decide whether it is the last stock unit left and if it should alert the user.
However, this alternative depends on whether the subscription service has all the 
information of all sizes in memory. In this case, a buffering window would only be an 
adequate choice if the system changes all sizes simultaneously; otherwise, most likely 
the service won’t have all the information needed. If we read the event stream and load 
all stock information to memory, we would address that problem. However, it would 
only make sense if the stock information isn’t excessive; otherwise, we risk occupying a 
significant percentage of the service’s memory.

6WRUH6WRFN3XUFKDVHGLQPHPRU\
3XEOLVK6WRFN3XUFKDVHG
,QYHQWRU\:ULWH
0RGHO
6XEVFULSWLRQ6HUYLFH
8SGDWHUHDGPRGHOVWRFN
0HVVDJH
4XHXH
,QYHQWRU\5HDG
0RGHO
$3,
'%
'%
'%
0HPRU\
3URFHVVHYHQW
DQGIHWFKLQ
PHPRU\VWRFN
6XEVFULSWLRQVHUYLFH
EXIIHUVWKHLQYHQWRU\
GDWDLQPHPRU\
Figure 5-9.  Subscription service saves the stock event stream in memory
Chapter 5  How to Manage Eventual Consistency

---

## Page 228

215
By keeping the information in memory, the service doesn’t need to request the 
information or persist it in a data store, making it easier to manage and contain costs. 
However, this is only relevant for small data sets; use cases with or more than hundreds 
of thousands of entities are better off by either persisting the information in a database 
or using another alternative. This alternative is also the most performant since all 
information is in memory; it is faster than fetching it from the database or doing a 
remote request.
5.6  Tackling Eventual Consistency with the  
End-to-End Argument: A Real-World Use Case
In this section, you will learn how to reduce the impact of smaller, eventually consistent 
parts of the system by guaranteeing the end-to-end flow’s correctness. You will learn 
what the end-to-end argument is and how we can use it in an event-driven architecture. 
We will illustrate its application by using an example of an eCommerce platform.
Until now we discussed a retail eCommerce platform that sells products to a general 
audience. When buying a product on that platform, the user creates an order which is 
processed by the order management boundary. To complete the full order workflow, 
several other boundaries would have to handle the event and process accordingly to their 
own domain; for example, the order boundary would publish an event signaling an order 
was created that would be consumed by the pricing boundary to apply the relevant taxes 
on the order, then the inventory would update the stock information, and so on. The 
product boundary would aggregate all the product information and provide read models 
to search on several product properties. By accessing the UI application, the user would be 
able to request information from these read models. Figure 5-10 illustrates this example.
Chapter 5  How to Manage Eventual Consistency

---

## Page 229

216
By reaping all the benefits event-driven provides, the product read models are 
eventually consistent. When the user browses the platform’s product catalog, it might see 
inaccurate information due to the data’s eventually consistent nature. The users might 
even try to buy products that don’t have stock anymore because the upstream services 
are still processing them. We can take several approaches; an interesting approach in 
this situation is the end-to-end argument.
The end-to-end argument was first articulated in an exciting paper12 by Saltzer, 
Reed, and Clark in the context of computer networking design. In it, they described 
how strong guarantees at low levels of the system might be hard to implement and 
have a negligible impact by providing them at that low level. The reliability guarantees 
could be implemented in the end-to-end flow rather than in smaller, low-level 
components. Doing so opens the opportunity for those smaller components to have 
more straightforward and more performant approaches by forfeiting those stronger 
guarantees.
In the paper, the authors describe the use case of a file transfer. There are several 
intermediate components between the transmitting and receiving computer to transfer 
one file between two computers. Each of those components can be the victim of several 
12 Full paper in J.H. Saltzer, D.P. Reed, and D.D. Clark, “End-to-end arguments in system design,” 
May/June 1998, https://web.mit.edu/Saltzer/www/publications/endtoend/endtoend.pdf
8,$SSOLFDWLRQ
8VHU
0HVVDJH
4XHXH
2UGHU0DQDJHPHQW%RXQGDU\
3ULFLQJ%RXQGDU\
8VHUEX\VDSURGXFW
0HVVDJH
4XHXH
3URGXFW%RXQGDU\
$3,
0HVVDJH
4XHXH
,QYHQWRU\%RXQGDU\
\
8VHUEURZVHVSURGXFWVRQWKHSODWIRUP
Figure 5-10.  User browses and buys a product on an eCommerce platform with 
several event-driven domain boundaries
Chapter 5  How to Manage Eventual Consistency

---

## Page 230

217
types of faults like system crashes or network faults. One can argue that to achieve a 
careful file transfer, we need to guarantee each component’s resilience and endow each 
component with retry strategies and duplicate copies to ensure it is fault-proof. However, 
providing those kinds of guarantees to each component will significantly harm those 
components’ performance and complexity. Besides, guaranteeing the fault tolerance 
in one component doesn’t ensure the end-to-end file transfer success. Thus, the 
implementation overhead of being exceptionally reliable in a single component does not 
reduce the end-to-end functionality burden to guarantee reliability.
To solve the issue for the use case in Figure 5-10, we could try to force the product 
boundary to be strongly consistent and provide consistent results. Every time any 
change occurred in the system, it would have to be reflected instantaneously on the 
product boundary. That strategy would also mean complex interactions and forfeiting 
decoupling between every other boundary and the product boundary. It would likely 
mean every other component of the workflow would have to guarantee consistency 
across boundaries, so each one provides consistent results all around. In a distributed 
system, this situation would mean sacrificing performance, availability, and the ability to 
scale seamlessly. It would also significantly increase the complexity of each component.
The end-to-end argument draws a compelling proposition that is applicable 
in a distributed microservice event-driven architecture. Instead of increasing each 
component’s complexity substantially, we could loosen the constraints on intermediate 
components of the flow as long as we guarantee the end-to-end flow’s consistency. In 
this concrete example, illustrated in Figure 5-11, we could maintain the decoupling 
between boundaries and keep the product boundary eventual consistent as long 
as at the moment of the purchase, the system would have a way to guarantee the 
information’s consistency, for example, the product having stock.
Chapter 5  How to Manage Eventual Consistency

---

## Page 231

218
The order management system would validate the conditions of the order before 
advancing with the flow. This example is the typical situation where you are browsing 
items on a website and, although the UI displayed that item as having stock, the 
checkout might fail because the UI wasn’t up to date anymore. This way, the component 
responsible for aggregating information from several different sources the UI needs 
(product information, stock, price, descriptions, etc.) can enjoy the decoupling and 
performance boost for not guaranteeing strong consistency, as long as there is an end-­
to-­end process that ensures the business rule is satisfied.
5.7  For Most Use Cases, It’s Not Eventual If Nobody 
Notices
In this section, we will put eventual consistency into perspective and understand how 
the business can coexist with it without considerable impact. We will discuss eventual 
consistency in NoSQL databases and detail how we can apply the same reasoning to 
event-driven systems.
As we discussed in Subsection 5.1, eventual consistency provides no safety 
guarantees. The very meaning of eventual is daunting; it states that sometime in the 
future the system will return a consistent result, but it doesn’t say when. It is hard 
for a business to come to terms with such a vague notion of something so pivotal as 
8,$SSOLFDWLRQ
8VHU
0HVVDJH
4XHXH
2UGHU0DQDJHPHQW%RXQGDU\
3ULFLQJ%RXQGDU\
8VHUEX\VDSURGXFW
0HVVDJH
4XHXH
3URGXFW%RXQGDU\
$3,
0HVVDJH
4XHXH
,QYHQWRU\%RXQGDU\
$3,
\
8VHUEURZVHVSURGXFWVRQWKHSODWIRUP
2UGHUPDQDJHPHQWGRHVDUHTXHVWWR
YDOLGDWHWKHHQGWRHQGFRQVLVWHQF\
ZKLOHWKHSURGXFWERXQGDU\UHPDLQV
HYHQWXDOO\FRQVLVWHQW
2UGHUYDOLGDWHVSURGXFW
VVWRFN
Figure 5-11.  End-to-end validation of the product’s stock
Chapter 5  How to Manage Eventual Consistency

---

## Page 232

219
consistency. It is also hard to manage the users’ expectations; an ordinary user expects 
changes to be instantaneous. It doesn’t expect them to take an indefinite amount of time 
to be reflected throughout the system, and surely explaining the CAP theorem to them 
isn’t the solution. Considering this, it might sound odd how NoSQL databases adopted 
eventual consistency and why it is widely deployed to production.
In NoSQL databases, it is observed that in practice, with real-world use cases, 
eventual consistency looks like strong consistency. Some studies show that the 
inconsistency window in eventually consistent databases is small and can often 
be neglected. For example, one study13 found that about 98% of requests have an 
inconsistency window between zero and one millisecond when within a single 
availability zone for Cassandra. For MongoDB, the same study shows an inconsistency 
window of 5ms or less in 96% of requests. Another study14 showed that out of the curve 
requests, Cassandra’s inconsistency window was almost always less than 200ms.
As we discussed in Subsection 5.1, it is fairly debatable if we should settle for 
eventual consistency in databases. But the fact they are widely adopted, and we can see 
eventual consistency as good enough for many use cases, raises the question of why. It 
is because, in practice, the inconsistency windows in these use cases are small. So small 
most often are deemed insignificant.
Eventual consistency is a consequence of event-driven systems. The best way to 
deal with it is by designing the system to be fast and guaranteeing the inconsistency 
windows are small. As proven by eventually consistent databases, if eventual consistency 
is fast enough, it appears strongly consistent, having a neglectable impact. Eventual 
consistency doesn’t need to be slow; if it is fast enough to appear strongly consistent, as 
far as users and developers are concerned, it isn’t eventually consistent.
What does it mean to be fast on an event-driven microservice? We need to build two 
fundamental characteristics from the ground up: the ability to scale and meaningful 
metrics. As discussed in Chapter 1, we design microservices to be autonomously 
developed and individually deployed. Also, they should be horizontally scalable. By 
providing these characteristics on an event-driven microservice, we can scale it on 
demand to face unforeseen peaks in load. We need meaningful metrics to react to 
13 Full paper in David Bermbach, Liang Zhao, and Sherif Sakr, “Towards Comprehensive  
Measurement of Consistency Guarantees for Cloud-Hosted Data Storage Services,”  
August 2013, www.researchgate.net/figure/Distribution-of-Inconsistency-Windows- 
in-MongoDB_fig5_259540354
14 Full paper in “Toward a Principled Framework for Benchmarking Consistency,” October 2012, 
www.usenix.org/system/files/conference/hotdep12/hotdep12-final17.pdf
Chapter 5  How to Manage Eventual Consistency

---

## Page 233

220
the system’s delay and use them to deploy new instances. One important metric is 
the number of messages waiting to be processed; if it is large, likely the inconsistency 
window also is. The best way to guarantee this happens seamlessly is to have an 
autoscale system in place and use it to react to unforeseen load peaks. When a metric, for 
example, the consumer lag, is above a given threshold, new instances will be deployed. 
We will work through a practical example in Subsection 5.7.1.
If we guarantee the size of inconsistency windows isn’t a concern; we can reduce the 
impact of eventual consistency with the best approach possible, by living with it.
5.7.1  Event-Driven Autoscaling Use Case 
with Prometheus and Kafka
In the last section, we discussed the importance of having a small inconsistency window 
to reduce the impact of eventual consistency. We also discussed how an autoscale 
system could help achieve this. In this section, we will explain how we could implement 
an autoscale system using Prometheus, Kubernetes, and Kafka.
In the example in Figure 5-5, the subscription service uses stock events to 
understand if the product has only one stock unit left in order to alert users. If the team 
managing the product’s stock does a massive stock import, it is very likely that the 
subscription service lags behind the unexpected load of messages. If we have a system 
in place to monitor the subscription service consumer lag (e.g., Prometheus and Kafka 
Exporter), we could react to the delay by deploying new service instances. We can make 
the detection and deployment of new instances automatic (e.g., Kubernetes and HPA). In 
Figure 5-12, we illustrate this example.
Relevant technologies mentioned in Figure 5-12:
Chapter 5  How to Manage Eventual Consistency

---

## Page 234

221
•	
Kubernetes: A platform for managing containerized services. This 
example will use it to read the relevant metrics for scaling and 
horizontally scale the application with new instances.
•	
HPA (horizontal pod autoscaler): Used by Kubernetes; 
automatically scales the number of instances of the application.
•	
Prometheus: Systems monitoring and alerting toolkit. This example 
will use it to import Kafka’s metrics and make them available to HPA.
•	
Kafka: An event streaming platform; can be used to publish and 
subscribe to streams of events. We will use it as the event broker 
where the service reads and publishes messages.
Figure 5-12.  Autoscaling subscription service example with Kubernetes, 
Prometheus, and Kafka
Chapter 5  How to Manage Eventual Consistency

---

## Page 235

222
•	
Kafka Exporter: Application to extract metrics from Kafka (e.g., 
topics and consumer lag) and expose them.
In the example, Kafka Exporter reads metrics from Kafka and exposes them to 
Prometheus. The most relevant metric in this example is the consumer lag; we want to 
deploy additional instances of the subscription service when the lag goes above a given 
threshold. Prometheus creates custom metrics for Kubernetes; we used Prometheus 
in this case because it is a powerful monitoring tool that can be combined with several 
other metric capabilities and exposes simple functionality to configure custom metrics. 
HPA will use the custom metrics exposed by Prometheus to add additional instances of 
subscription service when needed.
Subscription service lag will increase when inventory service publishes an 
unforeseen load of messages. When the lag reaches the specified threshold, the HPA will 
deploy additional subscription service instances to consume the lag faster. When below 
the threshold, it will remove the additional instances. Since there isn’t a throughput 
higher than expected and we dealt with the load peak, there is no need to oversize 
the service. So the HPA will automatically deallocate the resources, guaranteeing the 
additional cost for the other resources occurs only on the peak. This use case is one 
example of how we can use autoscaling to maintain the system fast and guarantee that 
the services don’t lag behind the changes the users do on the system.
5.8  Discussing the Tradeoffs of Typical Eventual 
Consistency Handling Strategies
In this section, we will discuss the tradeoffs of each solution we discussed until now and 
quickly sum up their advantages and limitations. This quick sum up will make it easier 
for you to weigh the tradeoffs when applying to a given use case.
In this chapter, we discussed several patterns of dealing with eventual consistency 
in several different use cases. Each of them has advantages and limitations, summed up 
in Table 5-1. The use cases you will find in real life sometimes will be easy to understand 
which one is the most adequate for that situation; some use cases won’t be so easy. Most 
of the time, several solutions can be applied to a use case making it hard to know which 
one to apply. Most of the time, there isn’t a perfect fit; it is about weighing the tradeoffs 
and making the best decision with the information we have.
Chapter 5  How to Manage Eventual Consistency

---

## Page 236

223
Table 5-1.  Tradeoffs of the different patterns
Pattern
Advantages
Limitations
Denormalized 
event schema
Straightforward to implement
Higher decoupling
Better performance due to the 
removal of the external request
Scaling is more linear due to the 
removal of a dependency
Larger events have a performance hit on 
the broker and producing and consuming 
messages (although much lesser than the 
external request)
The information has to be available on 
the upstream service; otherwise, it will 
significantly increase the complexity
Events might lose their meaning if they 
become too generic
Saving state
Future use cases might benefit 
from the local data
Higher decoupling
Better performance due to the 
external request removal
Scaling is more linear due to the 
dependency removal
More resiliency due to the 
dependency removal
Increase in storage cost
Development and maintenance overhead
Applied throughout the architecture, data 
will be copied several times; substantial 
changes to the source system schema might 
impact several services
Applying domain 
boundaries
None or little developments 
needed, just a clear strategy
Often comes for free if boundaries 
was a concern since the beginning
Overall time to process the flow will increase
Without boundaries and a clear strategy 
to manage the flow, it will soon become 
complex and hard to track
Event versioning Straightforward to implement
Useful when in need of an easy 
fast solution to an incident or 
urgent requirement
Doesn’t solve the eventual consistency; it’s 
just a band-aid
Without compensation actions might fail 
with load peaks
With compensation actions substantially 
increases the application complexity
Impacts performance
(continued)
Chapter 5  How to Manage Eventual Consistency

---

## Page 237

224
5.9  Summary
•	
Eventual consistency can impact the business, and we need to 
weigh the tradeoffs between using an event-driven or a synchronous 
approach.
•	
The tradeoffs between availability and consistency illustrated by the 
CAP theorem are significant when designing event-driven solutions, 
although the CAP theorem itself has limits.
•	
We can adapt the schema of events to avoid synchronous calls to 
eventually consistent read models, thus avoiding processing stale 
data.
•	
We can organize and structure our services so that downstream 
services don’t need to deal with eventual consistency, having in mind 
the flow of the business process.
•	
Event version and entity versioning are essential to understand if the 
service is processing stale data. Retries can be an alternative to deal 
with delays, although we often need a more sustainable approach.
•	
Saving a view of the external information can avoid the need to 
request synchronous information from eventual consistent read 
models. We can further optimize this by keeping the information in 
memory for small data sets.
Table 5-1.  (continued)
Pattern
Advantages
Limitations
End-to-end 
argument
Easy to implement
Gives the tools for intermediate 
components of the flow to be 
flexible about their consistency 
guarantees
Better performance on the overall 
flow
It is often needed a synchronous way to 
validate the business rule
Chapter 5  How to Manage Eventual Consistency

---

## Page 238

225
•	
With the end-to-end argument, instead of increasing each 
component’s complexity substantially, we could loosen the 
constraints on intermediate components of the flow as long as we 
guarantee the end-to-end flow’s consistency.
•	
Eventual consistency doesn’t need to be slow; if it is fast enough 
to appear strongly consistent, as far as users and developers are 
concerned, it isn’t eventually consistent.
Chapter 5  How to Manage Eventual Consistency

---

## Page 239

227
© Hugo Filipe Oliveira Rocha 2022 
H. F. Oliveira Rocha, Practical Event-Driven Microservices Architecture,  
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-7468-2_6
CHAPTER 6
Dealing with Concurrency 
and Out-of-Order 
Messages
This chapter covers:
•	
Why tackling concurrency in a monolithic application is different 
than tackling it in a distributed microservice architecture
•	
The impacts of concurrency in distributed event-driven services
•	
The differences between pessimistic and optimistic concurrency and 
when to use each
•	
How to apply pessimistic and optimistic concurrency strategies
•	
Using event versioning to handle out-of-order messages
•	
Applying end-to-end partitioning to avoid concurrency and out-of-­
order messages
•	
How to avoid hotspotting as a consequence of routing events
In Greek mythology, when Zeus sent Pandora to earth to be married, he wanted 
to punish the human race for accepting fire from Prometheus. Pandora, oblivious of 
his real intent, gratefully accepted his wedding gift, a mysterious jar that Zeus warned 
never to open. Pandora, who was created to be curious, couldn’t resist the desire to 
open the jar. When she finally did open it, all the world’s greatest evils and life’s most 
devious afflictions flew from that jar and cursed the world: envy, pain, hatred, war, event 
consumption concurrency, and unordered messages. However, Pandora was able to 
close the jar before the last thing flew out, the thing that killed message partitioning.

---

## Page 240

228
Mythology apart, concurrency is often a dreaded topic, an obscure concern 
banished to a scarce number of use cases and to those unlucky enough to need to face 
it. Reasoning with code that runs in parallel is challenging and often requires a trained 
mind. Concurrency issues can occur when two threads or services use the same resource 
or change the same state simultaneously (typically referred to as race conditions). Race 
conditions are often hard to understand, replicate, and tackle consistently.
Usually, race conditions are very challenging to pin down due to happening very 
sparingly. I’m sure you came across the argument “well, this will probably never 
happen” a time or another. There are probably race conditions on the software used 
today due to never being detected or the user just ignoring it and restarting the app or 
refreshing the page. However, when you move to a high-throughput, high-availability 
ecosystem with hundreds of changes per minute, that “probably never” becomes “almost 
certain.” For example, I had a team struggling with a bug that occurred once every one 
million calls; the service consumed approximately one hundred messages per second, 
which means it happened on average nine times per day. Now I can’t even tell you how 
hard it was to reproduce locally. If I had to design an experience to prove Murphy’s law, 
event-driven systems would likely be a viable candidate. The “everything that can go 
wrong will go wrong” plays an essential role in these situations. Event-driven services 
usually handle enormous loads turning near impossible chances into very likely, which 
many of the issues are related to parallel message processing. These issues must be dealt 
with upfront and must be tackled in the solution design with deliberate strategies. This 
chapter works through those strategies and explains how you can apply them to event-­
driven services.
We often use and work with sequential programs and applications without the need 
to worry about concurrency. In truth, without the performance requirements and relevant 
scale, concurrency is mostly unnecessary. Concurrency is performance; we use concurrent 
execution to increase throughput or reduce execution times, often to use all available 
physical resources and turn the system as fast as it can be. Performance often only 
becomes a concern with the relevant scale. Some applications might avoid concurrency 
issues; however, in event-driven architectures, they are an omnipresent concern.
Performance aside, concurrency can also become a concern with parallel requests 
to the same resource, for example, two users buying the same product at the same time. 
Monolithic applications traditionally tackle this issue with the traditional ways to deal 
with concurrency, like locking resources. We also often deal with this at the database 
level, for example, with transactions.
Chapter 6  Dealing with Concurrency and Out-of-Order Messages

---
