# 4. Building.Microservices

> Extracted from: `4. Building.Microservices.pdf` (pages 131-160)
> Total pages in PDF: 280

---

## Page 131

Custom Images
One of the challenges with automated configuration management systems like Pup‐
pet, Chef, and Ansible can be the time taken to run the scripts on a machine. Let’s
take a simple example of a server being provisioned and configured to allow for the
deployment of a Java application. Let’s assume I’m using AWS to provision the server,
using the standard Ubuntu image. The first thing I need to do is install the Oracle
JVM to run my Java application. I’ve seen this simple process take around five
minutes, with a couple of minutes taken up by the machine being provisioned, and a
few more to install the JVM. Then we can think about actually putting our software
on it.
This is actually a fairly trivial example. We will often want to install other common
bits of software. For example, we might want to use collectd for gathering OS stats,
use logstash for log aggregation, and perhaps install the appropriate bits of nagios for
monitoring (we’ll talk more about this software in Chapter 8). Over time, more
things might get added, leading to longer and longer amounts of time needed for pro‐
visioning of these dependencies.
Puppet, Chef, Ansible, and their ilk can be smart and will avoid installing software
that is already present. This does not mean that running the scripts on existing
machines will always be fast, unfortunately, as running all the checks takes time. We
also want to avoid keeping our machines around for too long, as we don’t want to
allow for too much configuration drift (which we’ll explore in more depth shortly).
And if we’re using an on-demand compute platform we might be constantly shutting
down and spinning up new instances on a daily basis (if not more frequently), so the
declarative nature of these configuration management tools may be of limited use.
Over time, watching the same tools get installed over and over again can become a
real drag. If you are trying to do this multiple times per day—perhaps as part of
development or CI—this becomes a real problem in terms of providing fast feedback.
It can also lead to increased downtime when deploying in production if your systems
don’t allow for zero-downtime deployment, as you’re waiting to install all the pre-
requisites on your machines even before you get to installing your software. Models
like blue/green deployment (which we’ll discuss in Chapter 7) can help mitigate this,
as they allow us to deploy a new version of our service without taking the old one
offline.
One approach to reducing this spin-up time is to create a virtual machine image that
bakes in some of the common dependencies we use, as shown in Figure 6-5. All virtu‐
alization platforms I’ve used allow you to build your own images, and the tools to do
so are much more advanced than they were even a few years ago. This shifts things
somewhat. Now we could bake the common tools into our own image. When we
Custom Images 
| 
111

---

## Page 132

want to deploy our software, we spin up an instance of this custom image, and all we
have to do is install the latest version of our service.
Figure 6-5. Creating a custom VM image
Of course, because you build the image only once, when you subsequently launch
copies of this image you don’t need to spend time installing your dependencies, as
they are already there. This can result in a significant time savings. If your core
dependencies don’t change, new versions of your service can continue to use the same
base image.
There are some drawbacks with this approach, though. Building images can take a
long time. This means that for developers you may want to support other ways of
deploying services to ensure they don’t have to wait half an hour just to create a
binary deployment. Second, some of the resulting images can be large. This could be
a real problem if you’re creating your own VMWare images, for example, as moving a
20GB image around a network isn’t always a simple activity. We’ll be looking at con‐
tainer technology shortly, and specifically Docker, which can avoid some of these
drawbacks.
Historically, one of the challenges is that the tool chain required to build such an
image varied from platform to platform. Building a VMWare image is different from
building an AWS AMI, a Vagrant image, or a Rackspace image. This may not have
been a problem if you had the same platform everywhere, but not all organizations
were this lucky. And even if they were, the tools in this space were often difficult to
work with, and they didn’t play nicely with other tools you might be using for
machine configuration.
Packer is a tool designed to make creation of images much easier. Using configuration
scripts of your choice (Chef, Ansible, Puppet, and more are supported), it allows us to
112 
| 
Chapter 6: Deployment

---

## Page 133

create images for different platforms from the same configuration. At the time of
writing, it has support for VMWare, AWS, Rackspace Cloud, Digital Ocean, and
Vagrant, and I’ve seen teams use it successfully for building Linux and Windows
images. This means you could create an image for deployment on your production
AWS environment and a matching Vagrant image for local development and test, all
from the same configuration.
Images as Artifacts
So we can create virtual machine images that bake in dependencies to speed up feed‐
back, but why stop there? We could go further, bake our service into the image itself,
and adopt the model of our service artifact being an image. Now, when we launch our
image, our service is there ready to go. This really fast spin-up time is the reason that
Netflix has adopted the model of baking its own services as AWS AMIs.
Just as with OS-specific packages, these VM images become a nice way of abstracting
out the differences in the technology stacks used to create the services. Do we care if
the service running on the image is written in Ruby or Java, and uses a gem or JAR
file? All we care about is that it works. We can focus our efforts, then, on automating
the creation and deployment of these images. This also becomes a really neat way to
implement another deployment concept, the immutable server.
Immutable Servers
By storing all our configuration in source control, we are trying to ensure that we can
automatically reproduce services and hopefully entire environments at will. But once
we run our deployment process, what happens if someone comes along, logs into the
box, and changes things independently of what is in source control? This problem is
often called configuration drift—the code in source control no longer reflects the con‐
figuration of the running host.
To avoid this, we can ensure that no changes are ever made to a running server.
Instead, any change, no matter how small, has to go through a build pipeline in order
to create a new machine. You can implement this pattern without using image-based
deployments, but it is also a logical extension of using images as artifacts. During our
image creation, for example, we could actually disable SSH, ensuring that no one
could even log onto the box to make a change!
The same caveats we discussed earlier about cycle time still apply, of course. And we
also need to ensure that any data we care about that is stored on the box is stored
elsewhere. These complexities aside, I’ve seen adopting this pattern lead to much
more straightforward deployments, and easier-to-reason-about environments. And
as I’ve already said, anything we can do to simplify things should be pursued!
Custom Images 
| 
113

---

## Page 134

Environments
As our software moves through our CD pipeline stages, it will also be deployed into
different types of environments. If we think of the example build pipeline in
Figure 6-4, we probably have to consider at least four distinct environments: one
environment where we run our slow tests, another for UAT, another for performance,
and a final one for production. Our microservice should be the same throughout, but
the environment will be different. At the very least, they’ll be separate, distinct collec‐
tions of configuration and hosts. But often they can vary much more than that. For
example, our production environment for our service might consist of multiple load-
balanced hosts spread across two data centers, whereas our test environment might
just have everything running on a single host. These differences in environments can
introduce a few problems.
I was bitten by this personally many years ago. We were deploying a Java web service
into a clustered WebLogic application container in production. This WebLogic cluster
replicated session state between multiple nodes, giving us some level of resilience if a
single node failed. However, the WebLogic licenses were expensive, as were the
machines our software was deployed onto. This meant that in our test environment,
our software was deployed on a single machine, in a nonclustered configuration.
This hurt us badly during one release. For WebLogic to be able to copy session state
between nodes, the session data needs to be properly serializable. Unfortunately, one
of our commits broke this, so when we deployed into production our session replica‐
tion failed. We ended up resolving this by pushing hard to replicate a clustered setup
in our test environment.
The service we want to deploy is the same in all these different environments, but
each of the environments serves a different purpose. On my developer laptop I want
to quickly deploy the service, potentially against stubbed collaborators, to run tests or
carry out some manual validation of behavior, whereas when I deploy into a produc‐
tion environment I may want to deploy multiple copies of my service in a load-
balanced fashion, perhaps split across one or more data centers for durability reasons.
As you move from your laptop to build server to UAT environment all the way to
production, you’ll want to ensure that your environments are more and more
production-like to catch any problems associated with these environmental differ‐
ences sooner. This will be a constant balance. Sometimes the time and cost to repro‐
duce production-like environments can be prohibitive, so you have to make
compromises. Additionally, sometimes using a production-like environment can slow
down feedback loops; waiting for 25 machines to install your software in AWS might
be much slower than simply deploying your service into a local Vagrant instance, for
example.
114 
| 
Chapter 6: Deployment

---

## Page 135

This balance, between production-like environments and fast feedback, won’t be
static. Keep an eye on the bugs you find further downstream and your feedback
times, and adjust this balance as required.
Managing environments for single-artfact monolithic systems can be challenging,
especially if you don’t have access to systems that are easily automatable. When you
think about multiple environments per microservice, this can be even more daunting.
We’ll look shortly at some different deployment platforms that can make this much
easier for us.
Service Configuration
Our services need some configuration. Ideally, this should be a small amount, and
limited to those features that change from one environment to another, such as what
username and password should I use to connect to my database? Configuration that
changes from one environment to another should be kept to an absolute minimum.
The more your configuration changes fundamental service behavior, and the more
that configuration varies from one environment to another, the more you will find
problems only in certain environments, which is painful in the extreme.
So if we have some configuration for our service that does change from one environ‐
ment to another, how should we handle this as part of our deployment process? One
option is to build one artifact per environment, with configuration inside the artifact
itself. Initially this seems sensible. The configuration is built right in; just deploy it
and everything should work fine, right? This is problematic. Remember the concept
of continuous delivery. We want to create an artifact that represents our release candi‐
date, and move it through our pipeline, confirming that it is good enough to go into
production. Let’s imagine I build a Customer-Service-Test and Customer-Service-
Prod artifacts. If my Customer-Service-Test artifact passes the tests, but it’s the
Customer-Service-Prod artifact that I actually deploy, can I be sure that I have veri‐
fied the software that actually ends up in production?
There are other challenges as well. First, there is the additional time taken to build
these artifacts. Next, the fact that you need to know at build time what environments
exist. And how do you handle sensitive configuration data? I don’t want information
about production passwords checked in with my source code, but if it is needed at
build time to create all those artifacts, this is often difficult to avoid.
A better approach is to create one single artifact, and manage configuration sepa‐
rately. This could be a properties file that exists for each environment, or different
parameters passed in to an install process. Another popular option, especially when
dealing with a larger number of microservices, is to use a dedicated system for pro‐
viding configuration, which we’ll explore more in Chapter 11.
Service Configuration 
| 
115

---

## Page 136

Service-to-Host Mapping
One of the questions that comes up quite early on in the discussion around microser‐
vices is “How many services per machine?” Before we go on, we should pick a better
term than machine, or even the more generic box that I used earlier. In this era of vir‐
tualization, the mapping between a single host running an operating system and the
underlying physical infrastructure can vary to a great extent. Thus, I tend to talk
about hosts, using them as a generic unit of isolation—namely, an operating system
onto which I can install and run my services. If you are deploying directly on to phys‐
ical machines, then one physical server maps to one host (which is perhaps not com‐
pletely correct terminology in this context, but in the absence of better terms may
have to suffice). If you’re using virtualization, a single physical machine can map to
multiple independent hosts, each of which could hold one or more services.
So when thinking of different deployment models, we’ll talk about hosts. So, then,
how many services per host should we have?
I have a definite view as to which model is preferable, but there are a number of fac‐
tors to consider when working out which model will be right for you. It’s also impor‐
tant to understand that some choices we make in this regard will limit some of the
deployment options available to us.
Multiple Services Per Host
Having multiple services per host, as shown in Figure 6-6, is attractive for a number
of reasons. First, purely from a host management point of view, it is simpler. In a
world where one team manages the infrastructure and another team manages the
software, the infrastructure team’s workload is often a function of the number of
hosts it has to manage. If more services are packed on to a single host, the host man‐
agement workload doesn’t increase as the number of services increases. Second is
cost. Even if you have access to a virtualization platform that allows you to provision
and resize virtual hosts, the virtualization can add an overhead that reduces the
underlying resources available to your services. In my opinion, both these problems
can be addressed with new working practices and technology, and we’ll explore that
shortly.
This model is also familiar to those who deploy into some form of an application con‐
tainer. In some ways, the use of an application container is a special case of the
multiple-services-per-host model, so we’ll look into that separately. This model can
also simplify the life of the developer. Deploying multiple services to a single host in
production is synonymous with deploying multiple services to a local dev worksta‐
tion or laptop. If we want to look at an alternative model, we want to find a way to
keep this conceptually simple for developers.
116 
| 
Chapter 6: Deployment

---

## Page 137

Figure 6-6. Multiple microservices per host
There are some challenges with this model, though. First, it can make monitoring
more difficult. For example, when tracking CPU, do I need to track the CPU of one
service independent of the others? Or do I care about the CPU of the box as a whole?
Side effects can also be hard to avoid. If one service is under significant load, it can
end up reducing the resources available to other parts of the system. Gilt, when scal‐
ing out the number of services it ran, hit this problem. Initially it coexisted many
services on a single box, but uneven load on one of the services would have an
adverse impact on everything else running on that host. This makes impact analysis
of host failures more complex as well—taking a single host out of commission can
have a large ripple effect.
Deployment of services can be somewhat more complex too, as ensuring one deploy‐
ment doesn’t affect another leads to additional headaches. For example, if I use Pup‐
pet to prepare a host, but each service has different (and potentially contradictory)
dependencies, how can I make that work? In the worst-case scenario, I have seen peo‐
ple tie multiple service deployments together, deploying multiple different services to
a single host in one step, to try to simplify the deployment of multiple services to one
host. In my opinion, the small upside in improving simplicity is more than out‐
weighed by the fact that we have given up one of the key benefits of microservices:
striving for independent release of our software. If you do adopt the multiple-
services-per-host model, make sure you keep hold of the idea that each service should
be deployed independently.
This model can also inhibit autonomy of teams. If services for different teams are
installed on the same host, who gets to configure the host for their services? In all
likelihood, this ends up getting handled by a centralized team, meaning it takes more
coordination to get services deployed.
Another issue is that this option can limit our deployment artifact options. Image-
based deployments are out, as are immutable servers unless you tie multiple different
services together in a single artifact, which we really want to avoid.
The fact that we have multiple services on a single host means that efforts to target
scaling to the service most in need of it can be complicated. Likewise, if one
Service-to-Host Mapping 
| 
117

---

## Page 138

microservice handles data and operations that are especially sensitive, we might want
to set up the underlying host differently, or perhaps even place the host itself in a sep‐
arate network segment. Having everything on one host means we might end up hav‐
ing to treat all services the same way even if their needs are different.
As my colleague Neal Ford puts it, many of our working practices around deploy‐
ment and host management are an attempt to optimize for scarcity of resources. In
the past, the only option if we wanted another host was to buy or rent another physi‐
cal machine. This often had a large lead time to it and resulted in a long-term finan‐
cial commitment. It wasn’t uncommon for clients I have worked with to provision
new servers only every two to three years, and trying to get additional machines out‐
side of these timelines was difficult. But on-demand computing platforms have dras‐
tically reduced the costs of computing resources, and improvements in virtualization
technology mean even for in-house hosted infrastructure there is more flexibility.
Application Containers
If you’re familiar with deploying .NET applications behind IIS or Java applications
into a servlet container, you will be well acquainted with the model where multiple
distinct services or applications sit inside a single application container, which in turn
sits on a single host, as we see in Figure 6-7. The idea is that the application container
your services live in gives you benefits in terms of improved manageability, such as
clustering support to handle grouping multiple instances together, monitoring tools,
and the like.
Figure 6-7. Multiple microservices per host
This setup can also yield benefits in terms of reducing overhead of language run‐
times. Consider running five Java services in a single Java servlet container. I only
have the overhead of one single JVM. Compare this with running five independent
JVMs on the same host when using embedded containers. That said, I still feel that
these application containers have enough downsides that you should challenge your‐
self to see if they are really required.
118 
| 
Chapter 6: Deployment

---

## Page 139

First among the downsides is that they inevitably constrain technology choice. You
have to buy into a technology stack. This can limit not only the technology choices
for the implementation of the service itself, but also the options you have in terms of
automation and management of your systems. As we’ll discuss shortly, one of the
ways we can address the overhead of managing multiple hosts is around automation,
and so constraining our options for resolving this may well be doubly damaging.
I would also question some of the value of the container features. Many of them tout
the ability to manage clusters to support shared in-memory session state, something
we absolutely want to avoid in any case due to the challenges this creates when scaling
our services. And the monitoring capabilities they provide won’t be sufficient when
we consider the sorts of joined-up monitoring we want to do in a microservices
world, as we’ll see in Chapter 8. Many of them also have quite slow spin-up times,
impacting developer feedback cycles.
There are other sets of problems too. Attempting to do proper lifecycle management
of applications on top of platforms like the JVM can be problematic, and more com‐
plex than simply restarting a JVM. Analyzing resource use and threads is also much
more complex, as you have multiple applications sharing the same process. And
remember, even if you do get value from a technology-specific container, they aren’t
free. Aside from the fact that many of them are commercial and so have a cost impli‐
cation, they add a resource overhead in and of themselves.
Ultimately, this approach is again an attempt to optimize for scarcity of resources that
simply may not hold up anymore. Whether you decide to have multiple services per
host as a deployment model, I would strongly suggest looking at self-contained
deployable microservices as artifacts. For .NET, this is possible with things like
Nancy, and Java has supported this model for years. For example, the venerable Jetty
embedded container makes for a very lightweight self-contained HTTP server, which
is the core of the Dropwizard stack. Google has been known to quite happily use
embedded Jetty containers for serving static content directly, so we know these things
can operate at scale.
Single Service Per Host
With a single-service-per-host model shown in Figure 6-8, we avoid side effects of
multiple hosts living on a single host, making monitoring and remediation much
simpler. We have potentially reduced our single points of failure. An outage to one
host should impact only a single service, although that isn’t always clear when you’re
using a virtualized platform. We’ll cover designing for scale and failure more in Chap‐
ter 11. We also can more easily scale one service independent from others, and deal
with security concerns more easily by focusing our attention only on the service and
host that requires it.
Service-to-Host Mapping 
| 
119

---

## Page 140

Figure 6-8. A single microservice per host
Just as important is that we have opened up the potential to use alternative deploy‐
ment techniques such as image-based deployments or the immutable server pattern,
which we discussed earlier.
We’ve added a lot of complexity in adopting a microservice architecture. The last
thing we want to do is go looking for more sources of complexity. In my opinion, if
you don’t have a viable PaaS available, then this model does a very good job of reduc‐
ing a system’s overall complexity. Having a single-service-per-host model is signifi‐
cantly easier to reason about and can help reduce complexity. If you can’t embrace
this model yet, I won’t say microservices aren’t for you. But I would suggest that you
look to move toward this model over time as a way of reducing the complexity that a
microservice architecture can bring.
Having an increased number of hosts has potential downsides, though. We have more
servers to manage, and there might also be a cost implication of running more dis‐
tinct hosts. Despite these problems, this is still the model I prefer for microservice
architectures. And we’ll talk about a few things we can do to reduce the overhead of
handling large numbers of hosts shortly.
Platform as a Service
When using a platform as a service (PaaS), you are working at a higher-level abstrac‐
tion than at a single host. Most of these platforms rely on taking a technology-specific
artifact, such as a Java WAR file or Ruby gem, and automatically provisioning and
running it for you. Some of these platforms will transparently attempt to handle scal‐
ing the system up and down for you, although a more common (and in my experi‐
ence less error-prone) way will allow you some control over how many nodes your
service might run on, but it handles the rest.
At the time of writing, most of the best, most polished PaaS solutions are hosted.
Heroku comes to mind as being probably the gold class of PaaS. It doesn’t just handle
running your service, it also supports services like databases in a very simple fashion.
120 
| 
Chapter 6: Deployment

---

## Page 141

Self-hosted solutions do exist in this space, although they are more immature than
the hosted solutions.
When PaaS solutions work well, they work very well indeed. However, when they
don’t quite work for you, you often don’t have much control in terms of getting under
the hood to fix things. This is part of the trade-off you make. I would say that in my
experience the smarter the PaaS solutions try to be, the more they go wrong. I’ve used
more than one PaaS that attempts to autoscale based on application use, but does it
badly. Invariably the heuristics that drive these smarts tend to be tailored for the aver‐
age application rather than your specific use case. The more nonstandard your appli‐
cation, the more likely it is that it might not play nicely with a PaaS.
As the good PaaS solutions handle so much for you, they can be an excellent way of
handling the increased overhead we get with having many more moving parts. That
said, I’m still not sure that we have all the models right in this space yet, and the limi‐
ted self-hosted options mean that this approach might not work for you. In the com‐
ing decade though I expect we’ll be targeting PaaS for deployment more than having
to self-manage hosts and deployments of individual services.
Automation
The answer to so many problems we have raised so far comes down to automation.
With a small number of machines, it is possible to manage everything manually. I
used to do this. I remember running a small set of production machines, and I would
collect logs, deploy software, and check processes by manually logging in to the box.
My productivity seemed to be constrained by the number of terminal windows I
could have open at once—a second monitor was a huge step up. This breaks down
really fast, though.
One of the pushbacks against the single-service-per-host setup is the perception that
the amount of overhead to manage these hosts will increase. This is certainly true if
you are doing everything manually. Double the servers, double the work! But if we
automate control of our hosts, and deployment of the services, then there is no rea‐
son why adding more hosts should increase our workload in a linear fashion.
But even if we keep the number of hosts small, we still are going to have lots of serv‐
ices. That means multiple deployments to handle, services to monitor, logs to collect.
Automation is essential.
Automation is also how we can make sure that our developers still remain produc‐
tive. Giving them the ability to self-service-provision individual services or groups of
services is key to making developers’ lives easier. Ideally, developers should have
access to exactly the same tool chain as is used for deployment of our production
services so as to ensure that we can spot problems early on. We’ll be looking at a lot of
technology in this chapter that embraces this view.
Automation 
| 
121

---

## Page 142

Picking technology that enables automation is highly important. This starts with the
tools used to manage hosts. Can you write a line of code to launch a virtual machine,
or shut one down? Can you deploy the software you have written automatically? Can
you deploy database changes without manual intervention? Embracing a culture of
automation is key if you want to keep the complexities of microservice architectures
in check.
Two Case Studies on the Power of Automation
It is probably helpful to give you a couple of concrete examples that explain the
power of good automation. One of our clients in Australia is RealEstate.com.au
(REA). Among other things, the company provides real estate listings for retail and
commercial customers in Australia and elsewhere in the Asia-Pacific region. Over a
number of years, it has been moving its platform toward a distributed, microservices
design. When it started on this journey it had to spend a lot of time getting the tool‐
ing around the services just right—making it easy for developers to provision
machines, to deploy their code, or monitor them. This caused a front-loading of work
to get things started.
In the first three months of this exercise, REA was able to move just two new micro‐
services into production, with the development team taking full responsibility for the
entire build, deployment, and support of the services. In the next three months,
between 10–15 services went live in a similar manner. By the end of the 18-month
period, REA had over 60–70 services.
This sort of pattern is also borne out by the experiences of Gilt, an online fashion
retailer that started in 2007. Gilt’s monolithic Rails application was starting to become
difficult to scale, and the company decided in 2009 to start decomposing the system
into microservices. Again automation, especially tooling to help developers, was
given as a key reason to drive Gilt’s explosion in the use of microservices. A year later,
Gilt had around 10 microservices live; by 2012, over 100; and in 2014, over 450
microservices by Gilt’s own count—in other words, around three services for every
developer in Gilt.
From Physical to Virtual
One of the key tools available to us in managing a large number of hosts is finding
ways of chunking up existing physical machines into smaller parts. Traditional virtu‐
alization like VMWare or that used by AWS has yielded huge benefits in reducing the
overhead of host management. However, there have been some new advances in this
space that are well worth exploring, as they can open up even more interesting possi‐
bilities for dealing with our microservice architecture.
122 
| 
Chapter 6: Deployment

---

## Page 143

Traditional Virtualization
Why is having lots of hosts expensive? Well, if you need a physical server per host, the
answer is fairly obvious. If this is the world you are operating in, then the multiple-
service-per-host model is probably right for you, although don’t be surprised if this
becomes an ever more challenging constraint. I suspect, however, that most of you
are using virtualization of some sort. Virtualization allows us to slice up a physical
server into separate hosts, each of which can run different things. So if we want one
service per host, can’t we just slice up our physical infrastructure into smaller and
smaller pieces?
Well, for some people, you can. However, slicing up the machine into ever increasing
VMs isn’t free. Think of our physical machine as a sock drawer. If we put lots of
wooden dividers into our drawer, can we store more socks or fewer? The answer is
fewer: the dividers themselves take up room too! Our drawer might be easier to deal
with and organize, and perhaps we could decide to put T-shirts in one of the spaces
now rather than just socks, but more dividers means less overall space.
In the world of virtualization, we have a similar overhead as our sock drawer dividers.
To understand where this overhead comes from, let’s look at how most virtualization
is done. Figure 6-9 shows a comparison of two types of virtualization. On the left, we
see the various layers involved in what is called type 2 virtualization, which is the sort
implemented by AWS, VMWare, VSphere, Xen, and KVM. (Type 1 virtualization
refers to technology where the VMs run directly on hardware, not on top of another
operating system.) On our physical infrastructure we have a host operating system.
On this OS we run something called a hypervisor, which has two key jobs. First, it
maps resources like CPU and memory from the virtual host to the physical host. Sec‐
ond, it acts as a control layer, allowing us to manipulate the virtual machines
themselves.
Figure 6-9. A comparison of standard Type 2 virtualization, and lightweight containers
From Physical to Virtual 
| 
123

---

## Page 144

Inside the VMs, we get what looks like completely different hosts. They can run their
own operating systems, with their own kernels. They can be considered almost her‐
metically sealed machines, kept isolated from the underlying physical host and the
other virtual machines by the hypervisor.
The problem is that the hypervisor here needs to set aside resources to do its job. This
takes away CPU, I/O, and memory that could be used elsewhere. The more hosts the
hypervisor manages, the more resources it needs. At a certain point, this overhead
becomes a constraint in slicing up your physical infrastructure any further. In prac‐
tice, this means that there are often diminishing returns in slicing up a physical box
into smaller and smaller parts, as proportionally more and more resources go into the
overhead of the hypervisor.
Vagrant
Vagrant is a very useful deployment platform, which is normally used for dev and test
rather than production. Vagrant provides you with a virtual cloud on your laptop.
Underneath, it uses a standard virtualization system (typically VirtualBox, although it
can use other platforms). It allows you to define a set of VMs in a text file, along with
how the VMs are networked together and which images the VMs should be based on.
This text file can be checked in and shared between team members.
This makes it easier for you to create production-like environments on your local
machine. You can spin up multiple VMs at a time, shut individual ones to test failure
modes, and have the VMs mapped through to local directories so you can make
changes and see them reflected immediately. Even for teams using on-demand cloud
platforms like AWS, the faster turnaround of using Vagrant can be a huge boon for
development teams.
One of the downsides, though, is that running lots of VMs can tax the average devel‐
opment machine. If we have one service to one VM, you may not be able to bring up
your entire system on your local machine. This can result in the need to stub out
some dependencies to make things manageable, which is one more thing you’ll have
to handle to ensure that the development and test experience is a good one.
Linux Containers
For Linux users, there is an alternative to virtualization. Rather than having a hyper‐
visor to segment and control separate virtual hosts, Linux containers instead create a
separate process space in which other processes live.
On Linux, process are run by a given user, and have certain capabilities based on how
the permissions are set. Processes can spawn other processes. For example, if I launch
a process in a terminal, that child process is generally considered a child of the termi‐
nal process. The Linux kernel’s job is maintaining this tree of processes.
124 
| 
Chapter 6: Deployment

---

## Page 145

Linux containers extend this idea. Each container is effectively a subtree of the overall
system process tree. These containers can have physical resources allocated to them,
something the kernel handles for us. This general approach has been around in many
forms, such as Solaris Zones and OpenVZ, but it is LXC that has become most popu‐
lar. LXC is now available out of the box in any modern Linux kernel.
If we look at a stack diagram for a host running LXC in Figure 6-9, we see a few dif‐
ferences. First, we don’t need a hypervisor. Second, although each container can run
its own operating system distribution, it has to share the same kernel (because the
kernel is where the process tree lives). This means that our host operating system
could run Ubuntu, and our containers CentOS, as long as they could both share the
same kernel.
We don’t just benefit from the resources saved by not needing a hypervisor. We also
gain in terms of feedback. Linux containers are much faster to provision than full-fat
virtual machines. It isn’t uncommon for a VM to take many minutes to start—but
with Linux containers, startup can take a few seconds. You also have finer-grained
control over the containers themselves in terms of assigning resources to them, which
makes it much easier to tweak the settings to get the most out of the underlying
hardware.
Due to the lighter-weight nature of containers, we can have many more of them run‐
ning on the same hardware than would be possible with VMs. By deploying one ser‐
vice per container, as in Figure 6-10, we get a degree of isolation from other
containers (although this isn’t perfect), and can do so much more cost effectively than
would be possible if we wanted to run each service in its own VM.
Figure 6-10. Running services in separate containers
Containers can be used well with full-fat virtualization too. I’ve seen more than one
project provision a large AWS EC2 instance and run LXC containers on it to get the
From Physical to Virtual 
| 
125

---

## Page 146

best of both worlds: an on-demand ephemeral compute platform in the form of EC2,
coupled with highly flexible and fast containers running on top of it.
Linux containers aren’t without some problems, however. Imagine I have lots of
microservices running in their own containers on a host. How does the outside world
see them? You need some way to route the outside world through to the underlying
containers, something many of the hypervisors do for you with normal virtualization.
I’ve seen many a person sink inordinate amounts of time into configuring port for‐
warding using IPTables to expose containers directly. Another point to bear in mind
is that these containers cannot be considered completely sealed from each other.
There are many documented and known ways in which a process from one container
can bust out and interact with other containers or the underlying host. Some of these
problems are by design and some are bugs that are being addressed, but either way if
you don’t trust the code you are running, don’t expect that you can run it in a con‐
tainer and be safe. If you need that sort of isolation, you’ll need to consider using vir‐
tual machines instead.
Docker
Docker is a platform built on top of lightweight containers. It handles much of the
work around handling containers for you. In Docker, you create and deploy apps,
which are synonymous with images in the VM world, albeit for a container-based
platform. Docker manages the container provisioning, handles some of the network‐
ing problems for you, and even provides its own registry concept that allows you to
store and version Docker applications.
The Docker app abstraction is a useful one for us, because just as with VM images the
underlying technology used to implement the service is hidden from us. We have our
builds for our services create Docker applications, and store them in the Docker reg‐
istry, and away we go.
Docker can also alleviate some of the downsides of running lots of services locally for
dev and test purposes. Rather than using Vagrant to host multiple independent VMs,
each one containing its own service, we can host a single VM in Vagrant that runs a
Docker instance. We then use Vagrant to set up and tear down the Docker platform
itself, and use Docker for fast provisioning of individual services.
A number of different technologies are being developed to take advantage of Docker.
CoreOS is a very interesting operating system designed with Docker in mind. It is a
stripped-down Linux OS that provides only the essential services to allow Docker to
run. This means it consumes fewer resources than other operating systems, making it
possible to dedicate even more resources of the underlying machine to our contain‐
ers. Rather than using a package manager like debs or RPMs, all software is installed
as independent Docker apps, each running in its own container.
126 
| 
Chapter 6: Deployment

---

## Page 147

Docker itself doesn’t solve all problems for us. Think of it as a simple PaaS that works
on a single machine. If you want tools to help you manage services across multiple
Docker instances across multiple machines, you’ll need to look at other software that
adds these capabilities. There is a key need for a scheduling layer that lets you request
a container and then finds a Docker container that can run it for you. In this space,
Google’s recently open sourced Kubernetes and CoreOS’s cluster technology can help,
and it seems every month there is a new entrant in this space. Deis is another inter‐
esting tool based on Docker, which is attempting to provide a Heroku-like PaaS on
top of Docker.
I talked earlier about PaaS solutions. My struggle with them has always been that they
often get the abstraction level wrong, and that self-hosted solutions lag significantly
behind hosted solutions like Heroku. Docker gets much more of this right, and the
explosion of interest in this space means I suspect it will become a much more viable
platform for all sorts of deployments over the next few years for all sorts of different
use cases. In many ways, Docker with an appropriate scheduling layer sits between
IaaS and PaaS solutions—the term containers as a service (CaaS) is already being used
to describe it.
Docker is being used in production by multiple companies. It provides many of the
benefits of lightweight containers in terms of efficiency and speed of provisioning,
together with the tools to avoid many of the downsides. If you are interested in look‐
ing at alternative deployment platforms, I’d strongly suggest you give Docker a look.
A Deployment Interface
Whatever underlying platform or artifacts you use, having a uniform interface to
deploy a given service is vital. We’ll want to trigger deployment of a microservice on
demand in a variety of different situations, from deployments locally for dev and test
to production deployments. We’ll also want to keep our deployment mechanisms as
similar as possible from dev to production, as the last thing we want is to find our‐
selves hitting problems in production because deployment uses a completely different
process!
After many years of working in this space, I am convinced that the most sensible way
to trigger any deployment is via a single, parameterizable command-line call. This
can be triggered by scripts, launched by your CI tool, or typed in by hand. I’ve built
wrapper scripts in a variety of technology stacks to make this work, from Windows
batch, to bash, to Python Fabric scripts, and more, but all of the command lines share
the same basic format.
We need to know what we are deploying, so we need to provide the name of a known
entity, or in our case a microservice. We also need to know what version of the entity
we want. The answer to what version tends to be one of three possibilities. When
A Deployment Interface 
| 
127

---

## Page 148

you’re working locally, it’ll be whatever version is on your local machine. When test‐
ing, you’ll want the latest green build, which could just be the most recent blessed arti‐
fact in our artifact repository. Or when testing/diagnosing issues, we may want to
deploy an exact build.
The third and final thing we’ll need to know is what environment we want the micro‐
service deployed into. As we discussed earlier, our microservice’s topology may differ
from one environment to the next, but that should be hidden from us here.
So, imagine we create a simple deploy script that takes these three parameters. Say
we’re developing locally and want to deploy our catalog service into our local envi‐
ronment. I might type:
$ deploy artifact=catalog environment=local version=local
Once I’ve checked in, our CI build service picks up the change and creates a new
build artifact, giving it the build number b456. As is standard in most CI tools, this
value gets passed along the pipeline. When our test stage gets triggered, the CI stage
will run:
$ deploy artifact=catalog environment=ci version=b456
Meanwhile, our QA wants to pull the latest version of the catalog service into an inte‐
grated test environment to do some exploratory testing, and to help with a showcase.
That team runs:
$ deploy artifact=catalog environment=integrated_qa version=latest
The tool I’ve used the most for this is Fabric, a Python library designed to map
command-line calls to functions, along with good support for handling tasks like SSH
into remote machines. Pair it with an AWS client library like Boto, and you have
everything you need to fully automate very large AWS environments. For Ruby, Capi‐
strano is similar in some ways to Fabric, and on Windows you could go a long way
using PowerShell.
Environment Definition
Clearly, for this to work, we need to have some way of defining what our environ‐
ments look like, and what our service looks like in a given environment. You can
think of an environment definition as a mapping from a microservice to compute,
network, and storage resources. I’ve done this with YAML files before, and used my
scripts to pull this data in. Example 6-1 is a simplified version of some work I did a
couple of years ago for a project that used AWS.
128 
| 
Chapter 6: Deployment

---

## Page 149

Example 6-1. An example environment definition
development:
  nodes:
  - ami_id: ami-e1e1234
    size:   t1.micro 
    credentials_name: eu-west-ssh 
    services: [catalog-service]
    region: eu-west-1
production:
  nodes:
  - ami_id: ami-e1e1234
    size:   m3.xlarge 
    credentials_name: prod-credentials 
    services: [catalog-service]
    number: 5  
We varied the size of the instances we used to be more cost effective. You don’t
need a 16-core box with 64GB of RAM for exploratory testing!
Being able to specify different credentials for different environments is key. Cre‐
dentials for sensitive environments were stored in different source code repos
that only select people would have access to.
We decided that by default if a service had more than one node configured, we
would automatically create a load balancer for it.
I have removed some detail for the sake of brevity.
The catalog-service information was stored elsewhere. It didn’t differ from one
environment to the next, as you can see in Example 6-2.
Example 6-2. An example environment definition
catalog-service:
  puppet_manifest : catalog.pp 
  connectivity:
    - protocol: tcp
      ports: [ 8080, 8081 ]
      allowed: [ WORLD ]
This was the name of the Puppet file to run—we happened to use Puppet solo in
this situation, but theoretically could have supported alternative configuration
systems.
A Deployment Interface 
| 
129

---

## Page 150

Obviously, a lot of the behavior here was convention based. For example, we decided
to normalize which ports services used wherever they ran, and automatically config‐
ured load balancers if a service had more than one instance (something that AWS’s
ELBs make fairly easy).
Building a system like this required a significant amount of work. The effort is often
front-loaded, but can be essential to manage the deployment complexity you have. I
hope in the future you won’t have to do this yourself. Terraform is a very new tool
from Hashicorp, which works in this space. I’d generally shy away from mentioning
such a new tool in a book that is more about ideas than technology, but it is attempt‐
ing to create an open source tool along these lines. It’s early days yet, but already its
capabilities seem really interesting. With the ability to target deployments on a num‐
ber of different platforms, in the future it could be just the tool for the job.
Summary
We’ve covered a lot of ground here, so a recap is in order. First, focus on maintaining
the ability to release one service independently from another, and make sure that
whatever technology you select supports this. I greatly prefer having a single reposi‐
tory per microservice, but am firmer still that you need one CI build per microservice
if you want to deploy them separately.
Next, if possible, move to a single-service per host/container. Look at alternative tech‐
nologies like LXC or Docker to make managing the moving parts cheaper and easier,
but understand that whatever technology you adopt, a culture of automation is key to
managing everything. Automate everything, and if the technology you have doesn’t
allow this, get some new technology! Being able to use a platform like AWS will give
you huge benefits when it comes to automation.
Make sure you understand the impact your deployment choices have on developers,
and make sure they feel the love too. Creating tools that let you self-service-deploy
any given service into a number of different environments is really important, and
will help developers, testers, and operations people alike.
Finally, if you want to go deeper into this topic, I thoroughly recommend you read Jez
Humble and David Farley’s Continuous Delivery (Addison-Wesley), which goes into
much more detail on subjects like pipeline design and artifact management.
In the next chapter, we’ll be going deeper into a topic we touched on briefly here.
Namely, how do we test our microservices to make sure they actually work?
130 
| 
Chapter 6: Deployment

---

## Page 151

CHAPTER 7
Testing
The world of automated testing has advanced significantly since I first started writing
code, and every month there seems to be some new tool or technique to make it even
better. But challenges remain as how to effectively and efficiently test our functional‐
ity when it spans a distributed system. This chapter breaks down the problems associ‐
ated with testing finer-grained systems and presents some solutions to help you make
sure you can release your new functionality with confidence.
Testing covers a lot of ground. Even when we are just talking about automated tests,
there are a large number to consider. With microservices, we have added another
level of complexity. Understanding what different types of tests we can run is impor‐
tant to help us balance the sometimes-opposing forces of getting our software into
production as quickly as possible versus making sure our software is of sufficient
quality.
Types of Tests
As a consultant, I like pulling out the odd quadrant as a way of categorizing the
world, and I was starting to worry this book wouldn’t have one. Luckily, Brian Marick
came up with a fantastic categorization system for tests that fits right in. Figure 7-1
shows a variation of Marick’s quadrant from Lisa Crispin and Janet Gregory’s book
Agile Testing (Addison-Wesley) that helps categorize the different types of tests.
131

---

## Page 152

Figure 7-1. Brian Marick’s testing quadrant. Crispin, Lisa; Gregory, Janet, Agile Testing:
A Practical Guide for Testers and Agile Teams, 1st Edition, © 2009. Adapted by permis‐
sion of Pearson Education, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ.
At the bottom, we have tests that are technology-facing—that is, tests that aid the
developers in creating the system in the first place. Performance tests and small-
scoped unit tests fall into this category—all typically automated. This is compared
with the top half of the quadrant, where tests help the nontechnical stakeholders
understand how your system works. These could be large-scoped, end-to-end tests, as
shown in the top-left Acceptance Test square, or manual testing as typified by user
testing done against a UAT system, as shown in the Exploratory Testing square.
Each type of test shown in this quadrant has a place. Exactly how much of each test
you want to do will depend on the nature of your system, but the key point to under‐
stand is that you have multiple choices in terms of how to test your system. The trend
recently has been away from any large-scale manual testing, in favor of automating as
much as possible, and I certainly agree with this approach. If you currently carry out
large amounts of manual testing, I would suggest you address that before proceeding
too far down the path of microservices, as you won’t get many of their benefits if you
are unable to validate your software quickly and efficiently.
For the purposes of this chapter, we will ignore manual testing. Although this sort of
testing can be very useful and certainly has its part to play, the differences with testing
a microservice architecture mostly play out in the context of various types of automa‐
ted tests, so that is where we will focus our time.
But when it comes to automated tests, how many of each test do we want? Another
model will come in very handy to help us answer this question, and understand what
the different trade-offs might be.
Test Scope
In his book Succeeding with Agile (Addison-Wesley), Mike Cohn outlines a model
called the Test Pyramid to help explain what types of automated tests you need. The
132 
| 
Chapter 7: Testing

---

## Page 153

pyramid helps us think about the scopes the tests should cover, but also the propor‐
tions of different types of tests we should aim for. Cohn’s original model split automa‐
ted tests into Unit, Service, and UI, which you can see in Figure 7-2.
Figure 7-2. Mike Cohn’s Test Pyramid. Cohn, Mike, Succeeding with Agile: Software
Development Using Scrum, 1st Edition, © 2010. Adapted by permission of Pearson Edu‐
cation, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ.
The problem with this model is that all these terms mean different things to different
people. “Service” is especially overloaded, and there are many definitions of a unit test
out there. Is a test a unit test if I only test one line of code? I’d say yes. Is it still a unit
test if I test multiple functions or classes? I’d say no, but many would disagree! I tend
to stick with the Unit and Service names despite their ambiguity, but much prefer
calling UI tests end-to-end tests, which we’ll do from now on.
Given the confusion, it’s worth us looking at what these different layers mean.
Let’s look at a worked example. In Figure 7-3, we have our helpdesk application and
our main website, both of which are interacting with our customer service to retrieve,
review, and edit customer details. Our customer service in turn is talking to our loy‐
alty points bank, where our customers accrue points by buying Justin Bieber CDs.
Probably. This is obviously a sliver of our overall music shop system, but it is a good
enough slice for us to dive into a few different scenarios we may want to test.
Figure 7-3. Part of our music shop under test
Test Scope 
| 
133

---

## Page 154

Unit Tests
These are tests that typically test a single function or method call. The tests generated
as a side effect of test-driven design (TDD) will fall into this category, as do the sorts of
tests generated by techniques such as property-based testing. We’re not launching
services here, and are limiting the use of external files or network connections. In
general, you want a large number of these sorts of tests. Done right, they are very,
very fast, and on modern hardware you could expect to run many thousands of these
in less than a minute.
These are tests that help us developers and so would be technology-facing, not
business-facing, in Marick’s terminology. They are also where we hope to catch most
of our bugs. So, in our example, when we think about the customer service, unit tests
would cover small parts of the code in isolation, as shown in Figure 7-4.
Figure 7-4. Scope of unit tests on our example system
The prime goal of these tests is to give us very fast feedback about whether our func‐
tionality is good. Tests can be important to support refactoring of code, allowing us to
restructure our code as we go, knowing that our small-scoped tests will catch us if we
make a mistake.
Service Tests
Service tests are designed to bypass the user interface and test services directly. In a
monolithic application, we might just be testing a collection of classes that provide a
service to the UI. For a system comprising a number of services, a service test would
test an individual service’s capabilities.
The reason we want to test a single service by itself is to improve the isolation of the
test to make finding and fixing problems faster. To achieve this isolation, we need to
stub out all external collaborators so only the service itself is in scope, as Figure 7-5
shows.
134 
| 
Chapter 7: Testing

---

## Page 155

Figure 7-5. Scope of service tests on our example system
Some of these tests could be as fast as small tests, but if you decide to test against a
real database, or go over networks to stubbed downstream collaborators, test times
can increase. They also cover more scope than a simple unit test, so that when they
fail it can be harder to detect what is broken than with a unit test. However, they have
much fewer moving parts and are therefore less brittle than larger-scoped tests.
End-to-End Tests
End-to-end tests are tests run against your entire system. Often they will be driving a
GUI through a browser, but could easily be mimicking other sorts of user interaction,
like uploading a file.
These tests cover a lot of production code, as we see in Figure 7-6 . So when they pass,
you feel good: you have a high degree of confidence that the code being tested will
work in production. But this increased scope comes with downsides, and as we’ll see
shortly, they can be very tricky to do well in a microservices context.
Figure 7-6. Scope of end-to-end tests on our example system
Trade-Offs
When you’re reading the pyramid, the key thing to take away is that as you go up the
pyramid, the test scope increases, as does our confidence that the functionality being
tested works. On the other hand, the feedback cycle time increases as the tests take
longer to run, and when a test fails it can be harder to determine which functionality
Test Scope 
| 
135

---

## Page 156

has broken. As you go down the pyramid, in general the tests become much faster, so
we get much faster feedback cycles. We find broken functionality faster, our continu‐
ous integration builds are faster, and we are less likely to move on to a new task
before finding out we have broken something. When those smaller-scoped tests fail,
we also tend to know what broke, often exactly what line of code. On the flipside, we
don’t get a lot of confidence that our system as a whole works if we’ve only tested one
line of code!
When broader-scoped tests like our service or end-to-end tests fail, we will try to
write a fast unit test to catch that problem in the future. In that way, we are constantly
trying to improve our feedback cycles.
Virtually every team I’ve worked on has used different names than the ones that
Cohn uses in the pyramid. Whatever you call them, the key takeaway is that you will
want tests of different scope for different purposes.
How Many?
So if these tests all have trade-offs, how many of each type do you want? A good rule
of thumb is that you probably want an order of magnitude more tests as you descend
the pyramid, but the important thing is knowing that you do have different types of
automated tests and understanding if your current balance gives you a problem!
I worked on one monolithic system, for example, where we had 4,000 unit tests, 1,000
service tests, and 60 end-to-end tests. We decided that from a feedback point of view
we had way too many service and end-to-end tests (the latter of which were the worst
offenders in impacting feedback loops), so we worked hard to replace the test cover‐
age with smaller-scoped tests.
A common anti-pattern is what is often referred to as a test snow cone, or inverted
pyramid. Here, there are little to no small-scoped tests, with all the coverage in large-
scoped tests. These projects often have glacially slow test runs, and very long feed‐
back cycles. If these tests are run as part of continuous integration, you won’t get
many builds, and the nature of the build times means that the build can stay broken
for a long period when something does break.
Implementing Service Tests
Implementing unit tests is a fairly simple affair in the grand scheme of things, and
there is plenty of documentation out there explaining how to write them. The service
and end-to-end tests are the ones that are more interesting.
Our service tests want to test a slice of functionality across the whole service, but to
isolate ourselves from other services we need to find some way to stub out all of our
collaborators. So, if we wanted to write a test like this for the customer service from
136 
| 
Chapter 7: Testing

---

## Page 157

Figure 7-3, we would deploy an instance of the customer service, and as discussed
earlier we would want to stub out any downstream services.
One of the first things our continuous integration build will do is create a binary arti‐
fact for our service, so deploying that is pretty straightforward. But how do we handle
faking the downstream collaborators?
Our service test suite needs to launch stub services for any downstream collaborators
(or ensure they are running), and configure the service under test to connect to the
stub services. We then need to configure the stubs to send responses back to mimic
the real-world services. For example, we might configure the stub for the loyalty
points bank to return known points balances for certain customers.
Mocking or Stubbing
When I talk about stubbing downstream collaborators, I mean that we create a stub
service that responds with canned responses to known requests from the service
under test. For example, I might tell my stub points bank that when asked for the bal‐
ance of customer 123, it should return 15,000. The test doesn’t care if the stub is
called 0, 1, or 100 times. A variation on this is to use a mock instead of a stub.
When using a mock, I actually go further and make sure the call was made. If the
expected call is not made, the test fails. Implementing this approach requires more
smarts in the fake collaborators that we create, and if overused can cause tests to
become brittle. As noted, however, a stub doesn’t care if it is called 0, 1, or many
times.
Sometimes, though, mocks can be very useful to ensure that the expected side effects
happen. For example, I might want to check that when I create a customer, a new
points balance is set up for that customer. The balance between stubbing and mock‐
ing calls is a delicate one, and is just as fraught in service tests as in unit tests. In gen‐
eral, though, I use stubs far more than mocks for service tests. For a more in-depth
discussion of this trade-off, take a look at Growing Object-Oriented Software, Guided
by Tests, by Steve Freeman and Nat Pryce (Addison-Wesley).
In general, I rarely use mocks for this sort of testing. But having a tool that can do
both is useful.
While I feel that stubs and mocks are actually fairly well differentiated, I know the
distinction can be confusing to some, especially when some people throw in other
terms like fakes, spies, and dummies. Martin Fowler calls all of these things, including
stubs and mocks, test doubles.
Implementing Service Tests 
| 
137

---

## Page 158

A Smarter Stub Service
Normally for stub services I’ve rolled them myself. I’ve used everything from Apache
or Nginx to embedded Jetty containers or even command-line-launched Python web
servers used to launch stub servers for such test cases. I’ve probably reproduced the
same work time and time again in creating these stubs. My ThoughtWorks colleague
Brandon Bryars has potentially saved many of us a chunk of work with his stub/mock
server called Mountebank.
You can think of Mountebank as a small software appliance that is programmable via
HTTP. The fact that it happens to be written in NodeJS is completely opaque to any
calling service. When it launches, you send it commands telling it what port to stub
on, what protocol to handle (currently TCP, HTTP, and HTTPS are supported, with
more planned), and what responses it should send when requests are sent. It also sup‐
ports setting expectations if you want to use it as a mock. You can add or remove
these stub endpoints at will, making it possible for a single Mountebank instance to
stub more than one downstream dependency.
So, if we want to run our service tests for just our customer service we can launch the
customer service, and a Mountebank instance that acts as our loyalty points bank.
And if those tests pass, I can deploy the customer service straightaway! Or can I?
What about the services that call the customer service—the helpdesk and the web
shop? Do we know if we have made a change that may break them? Of course, we
have forgotten the important tests at the top of the pyramid: the end-to-end tests.
Those Tricky End-to-End Tests
In a microservice system, the capabilities we expose via our user interfaces are deliv‐
ered by a number of services. The point of the end-to-end tests as outlined in Mike
Cohn’s pyramid is to drive functionality through these user interfaces against every‐
thing underneath to give us an overview of a large amount of our system.
So, to implement an end-to-end test we need to deploy multiple services together,
then run a test against all of them. Obviously, this test has much more scope, result‐
ing in more confidence that our system works! On the other hand, these tests are lia‐
ble to be slower and make it harder to diagnose failure. Let’s dig into them a bit more
using our previous example to see how these tests can fit in.
Imagine we want to push out a new version of the customer service. We want to
deploy our changes into production as soon as possible, but are concerned that we
may have introduced a change that could break either the helpdesk or the web shop.
No problem—let’s deploy all of our services together, and run some tests against the
helpdesk and web shop to see if we’ve introduced a bug. Now a naive approach would
be to just add these tests onto the end of our customer service pipeline, as in
Figure 7-7.
138 
| 
Chapter 7: Testing

---

## Page 159

Figure 7-7. Adding our end-to-end tests stage: the right approach?
So far, so good. But the first question we have to ask ourselves is which version of the
other services should we use? Should we run our tests against the versions of help‐
desk and web shop that are in production? It’s a sensible assumption, but what if there
is a new version of either the helpdesk or web shop queued up to go live; what should
we do then?
Another problem: if we have a set of customer service tests that deploy lots of services
and run tests against them, what about the end-to-end tests that the other services
run? If they are testing the same thing, we may find ourselves covering lots of the
same ground, and may duplicate a lot of the effort to deploy all those services in the
first place.
We can deal with both of these problems elegantly by having multiple pipelines fan in
to a single, end-to-end test stage. Here, whenever a new build of one of our services is
triggered, we run our end-to-end tests, an example of which we can see in Figure 7-8.
Some CI tools with better build pipeline support will enable fan-in models like this
out of the box.
Figure 7-8. A standard way to handle end-to-end tests across services
So any time any of our services changes, we run the tests local to that service. If those
tests pass, we trigger our integration tests. Great, eh? Well, there are a few problems.
Those Tricky End-to-End Tests 
| 
139

---

## Page 160

1 Diane Vaughan, The Challenger Launch Decision: Risky Technology, Culture, and Deviance at NASA (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1996).
Downsides to End-to-End Testing
There are, unfortunately, many disadvantages to end-to-end testing.
Flaky and Brittle Tests
As test scope increases, so too do the number of moving parts. These moving parts
can introduce test failures that do not show that the functionality under test is bro‐
ken, but that some other problem has occurred. As an example, if we have a test to
verify that we can place an order for a single CD, but we are running that test against
four or five services, if any of them is down we could get a failure that has nothing to
do with the nature of the test itself. Likewise, a temporary network glitch could cause
a test to fail without saying anything about the functionality under test.
The more moving parts, the more brittle our tests may be, and the less deterministic
they are. If you have tests that sometimes fail, but everyone just re-runs them because
they may pass again later, then you have flaky tests. It isn’t only tests covering lots of
different process that are the culprit here. Tests that cover functionality being exer‐
cised on multiple threads are often problematic, where a failure could mean a race
condition, a timeout, or that the functionality is actually broken. Flaky tests are the
enemy. When they fail, they don’t tell us much. We re-run our CI builds in the hope
that they will pass again later, only to see check-ins pile up, and suddenly we find our‐
selves with a load of broken functionality.
When we detect flaky tests, it is essential that we do our best to remove them. Other‐
wise, we start to lose faith in a test suite that “always fails like that.” A test suite with
flaky tests can become a victim of what Diane Vaughan calls the normalization of
deviance—the idea that over time we can become so accustomed to things being
wrong that we start to accept them as being normal and not a problem.1 This very
human tendency means we need to find and eliminate these tests as soon as we can
before we start to assume that failing tests are OK.
In “Eradicating Non-Determinism in Tests”, Martin Fowler advocates the approach
that if you have flaky tests, you should track them down and if you can’t immediately
fix them, remove them from the suite so you can treat them. See if you can rewrite
them to avoid testing code running on multiple threads. See if you can make the
underlying environment more stable. Better yet, see if you can replace the flaky test
with a smaller-scoped test that is less likely to exhibit problems. In some cases, chang‐
ing the software under test to make it easier to test can also be the right way forward.
140 
| 
Chapter 7: Testing

---
