# 2. Microservices Patterns With examples in Java 1st edition

> Extracted from: `2. Microservices Patterns With examples in Java 1st edition.pdf` (pages 292-350)
> Total pages in PDF: 522

---

## Page 292

262
CHAPTER 8
External API patterns
PROTOCOL TRANSLATION
An API gateway might also perform protocol translation. It might provide a RESTful
API to external clients, even though the application services use a mixture of protocols
internally, including REST and gRPC. When needed, the implementation of some
API operations translates between the RESTful external API and the internal gRPC-
based APIs. 
THE API GATEWAY PROVIDES EACH CLIENT WITH CLIENT-SPECIFIC API
An API gateway could provide a single one-size-fits-all (OSFA) API. The problem with
a single API is that different clients often have different requirements. For instance, a
third-party application might require the Get Order Details API operation to return
the complete Order details, whereas a mobile client only needs a subset of the data.
One way to solve this problem is to give clients the option of specifying in a request
which fields and related objects the server should return. This approach is adequate
for a public API that must serve a broad range of third-party applications, but it often
doesn’t give clients the control they need.
 A better approach is for the API gateway to provide each client with its own API.
For example, the FTGO API gateway can provide the FTGO mobile client with an API
that’s specifically designed to meet its requirements. It may even have different APIs
for the Android and iPhone mobile applications. The API gateway will also implement
a public API for third-party developers to use. Later on, I’ll describe the Backends for
frontends pattern that takes this concept of an API-per-client even further by defining
a separate API gateway for each client. 
IMPLEMENTING EDGE FUNCTIONS
Although an API gateway’s primary responsibilities are API routing and composition,
it may also implement what are known as edge functions. An edge function is, as the
name suggests, a request-processing function implemented at the edge of an applica-
tion. Examples of edge functions that an application might implement include the
following:
Authentication—Verifying the identity of the client making the request.
Authorization—Verifying that the client is authorized to perform that particular
operation.
Rate limiting —Limiting how many requests per second from either a specific cli-
ent and/or from all clients.
Caching—Cache responses to reduce the number of requests made to the services.
Metrics collection—Collect metrics on API usage for billing analytics purposes.
Request logging—Log requests.
There are three different places in your application where you could implement these
edge functions. First, you can implement them in the backend services. This might
make sense for some functions, such as caching, metrics collection, and possibly autho-
rization. But it’s generally more secure if the application authenticates requests on the
edge before they reach the services.

---

## Page 293

263
The API gateway pattern
 The second option is to implement these edge functions in an edge service that’s
upstream from the API gateway. The edge service is the first point of contact for an
external client. It authenticates the request and performs other edge processing
before passing it to the API gateway.
 An important benefit of using a dedicated edge service is that it separates con-
cerns. The API gateway focuses on API routing and composition. Another benefit is
that it centralizes responsibility for critical edge functions such as authentication.
That’s particularly valuable when an application has multiple API gateways that are
possibly written using a variety of languages and frameworks. I’ll talk more about that
later. The drawback of this approach is that it increases network latency because of the
extra hop. It also adds to the complexity of the application.
 As a result, it’s often convenient to use the third option and implement these edge
functions, especially authorization, in the API gateway itself. There’s one less network
hop, which improves latency. There are also fewer moving parts, which reduces com-
plexity. Chapter 11 describes how the API gateway and the services collaborate to
implement security. 
API GATEWAY ARCHITECTURE
An API gateway has a layered, modular architecture. Its architecture, shown in figure 8.5,
consists of two layers: the API layer and a common layer. The API layer consists of
one or more independent API modules. Each API module implements an API for a
API gateway
Mobile client
Mobile API
API layer
Browser JavaScript
application
Browser API
Common layer
3rd-party application
Public API
Figure 8.5
An API gateway has a layered modular architecture. The API for each client is 
implemented by a separate module. The common layer implements functionality common to all 
APIs, such as authentication.

---

## Page 294

264
CHAPTER 8
External API patterns
particular client. The common layer implements shared functionality, including edge
functions such as authentication.
 In this example, the API gateway has three API modules:
Mobile API—Implements the API for the FTGO mobile client
Browser API—Implements the API for the JavaScript application running in the
browser
Public API—Implements the API for third-party developers
An API module implements each API operation in one of two ways. Some API opera-
tions map directly to single service API operation. An API module implements these
operations by routing requests to the corresponding service API operation. It might
route requests using a generic routing module that reads a configuration file describ-
ing the routing rules.
 An API module implements other, more complex API operations using API com-
position. The implementation of this API operation consists of custom code. Each API
operation implementation handles requests by invoking multiple services and com-
bining the results. 
API GATEWAY OWNERSHIP MODEL
An important question that you must answer is who is responsible for the develop-
ment of the API gateway and its operation? There are a few different options. One is
for a separate team to be responsible for the API gateway. The drawback to that is that
it’s similar to SOA, where an Enterprise Service Bus (ESB) team was responsible for all
ESB development. If a developer working on the mobile application needs access to a
particular service, they must submit a request to the API gateway team and wait for
them to expose the API. This kind of centralized bottleneck in the organization is very
much counter to the philosophy of the microservice architecture, which promotes
loosely coupled autonomous teams.
 A better approach, which has been promoted by Netflix, is for the client teams—
the mobile, web, and public API teams—to own the API module that exposes their
API. An API gateway team is responsible for developing the Common module and for
the operational aspects of the gateway. This ownership model, shown in figure 8.6,
gives the teams control over their APIs.
 When a team needs to change their API, they check in the changes to the source
repository for the API gateway. To work well, the API gateway’s deployment pipeline
must be fully automated. Otherwise, the client teams will often be blocked waiting for
the API gateway team to deploy the new version. 
USING THE BACKENDS FOR FRONTENDS PATTERN
One concern with an API gateway is that responsibility for it is blurred. Multiple teams
contribute to the same code base. An API gateway team is responsible for its opera-
tion. Though not as bad as a SOA ESB, this blurring of responsibilities is counter to
the microservice architecture philosophy of “if you build it, you own it.”

---

## Page 295

265
The API gateway pattern
The solution is to have an API gateway for each client, the so-called Backends for front-
ends (BFF) pattern, which was pioneered by Phil Calçado (http://philcalcado.com/)
and his colleagues at SoundCloud. As figure 8.7 shows, each API module becomes its
own standalone API gateway that’s developed and operated by a single client team.
Pattern: Backends for frontends
Implement a separate API gateway for each type of client. See http://microservices
.io/patterns/apigateway.html.
API gateway
Mobile client
Mobile API
API layer
Browser JavaScript
application
Browser API
Common layer
3rd-party application
Public API
Mobile client team
API gateway team
Browser client team
Owns
Owns
Owns
Owns
Public API team
Figure 8.6
A client team owns their API module. As they change the client, they can change the API 
module and not ask the API gateway team to make the changes.

---

## Page 296

266
CHAPTER 8
External API patterns
The public API team owns and operates their API gateway, the mobile team owns and
operates theirs, and so on. In theory, different API gateways could be developed using
different technology stacks. But that risks duplicating code for common functionality,
such as the code that implements edge functions. Ideally, all API gateways use the
same technology stack. The common functionality is a shared library implemented by
the API gateway team.
 Besides clearly defining responsibilities, the BFF pattern has other benefits. The
API modules are isolated from one another, which improves reliability. One misbehav-
ing API can’t easily impact other APIs. It also improves observability, because different
API modules are different processes. Another benefit of the BFF pattern is that each
API is independently scalable. The BFF pattern also reduces startup time because
each API gateway is a smaller, simpler application. 
 
 
Mobile API
gateway
Mobile client
Mobile API
API layer
Common layer
Browser API
gateway
Browser API
API layer
Common layer
Public API
gateway
Public API
API layer
Common layer
Mobile client team
Browser client team
Owns
Owns
Owns
Public API team
Browser JavaScript
application
3rd-party application
Figure 8.7
The Backends for frontends pattern defines a separate API gateway for each client. Each 
client team owns their API gateway. An API gateway team owns the common layer.

---

## Page 297

267
The API gateway pattern
8.2.2
Benefits and drawbacks of an API gateway
As you might expect, the API gateway pattern has both benefits and drawbacks.
BENEFITS OF AN API GATEWAY
A major benefit of using an API gateway is that it encapsulates internal structure of the
application. Rather than having to invoke specific services, clients talk to the gateway.
The API gateway provides each client with a client-specific API, which reduces the
number of round-trips between the client and application. It also simplifies the client
code. 
DRAWBACKS OF AN API GATEWAY
The API gateway pattern also has some drawbacks. It is yet another highly available
component that must be developed, deployed, and managed. There’s also a risk that
the API gateway becomes a development bottleneck. Developers must update the API
gateway in order to expose their services’s API. It’s important that the process for
updating the API gateway be as lightweight as possible. Otherwise, developers will be
forced to wait in line in order to update the gateway. Despite these drawbacks, though,
for most real-world applications, it makes sense to use an API gateway. If necessary,
you can use the Backends for frontends pattern to enable the teams to develop and
deploy their APIs independently. 
8.2.3
Netflix as an example of an API gateway
A great example of an API gateway is the Netflix API. The Netflix streaming service is
available on hundreds of different kinds of devices including televisions, Blu-ray
players, smartphones, and many more gadgets. Initially, Netflix attempted to have a
one-size-fits-all style API for its streaming service (www.programmableweb.com/news/
why-rest-keeps-me-night/2012/05/15). But the company soon discovered that didn’t
work well because of the diverse range of devices and their different needs. Today,
Netflix uses an API gateway that implements a separate API for each device. The client
device team develops and owns the API implementation.
 In the first version of the API gateway, each client team implemented their API
using Groovy scripts that perform routing and API composition. Each script invoked
one or more service APIs using Java client libraries provided by the service teams. On
one hand, this works well, and client developers have written thousands of scripts. The
Netflix API gateway handles billions of requests per day, and on average each API call
fans out to six or seven backend services. On the other hand, Netflix has found this
monolithic architecture to be somewhat cumbersome.
 As a result, Netflix is now moving to an API gateway architecture similar to the
Backends for frontends pattern. In this new architecture, client teams write API mod-
ules using NodeJS. Each API module runs its own Docker container, but the scripts
don’t invoke the services directly. Rather, they invoke a second “API gateway,” which
exposes the service APIs using Netflix Falcor. Netflix Falcor is an API technology that
does declarative, dynamic API composition and enables a client to invoke multiple

---

## Page 298

268
CHAPTER 8
External API patterns
services using a single request. This new architecture has a number of benefits. The
API modules are isolated from one another, which improves reliability and observabil-
ity, and the client API module is independently scalable. 
8.2.4
API gateway design issues
Now that we’ve looked at the API gateway pattern and its benefits and drawbacks, let’s
examine various API gateway design issues. There are several issues to consider when
designing an API gateway:
Performance and scalability
Writing maintainable code by using reactive programming abstractions
Handling partial failure
Being a good citizen in the application’s architecture
We’ll look at each one.
PERFORMANCE AND SCALABILITY
An API gateway is the application’s front door. All external requests must first pass
through the gateway. Although most companies don’t operate at the scale of Netflix,
which handles billions of requests per day, the performance and scalability of the API
gateway is usually very important. A key design decision that affects performance and
scalability is whether the API gateway should use synchronous or asynchronous I/O.
 In the synchronous I/O model , each network connection is handled by a dedicated
thread. This is a simple programming model and works reasonably well. For example,
it’s the basis of the widely used Java EE servlet framework, although this framework
provides the option of completing a request asynchronously. One limitation of syn-
chronous I/O, however, is that operating system threads are heavyweight, so there is a
limit on the number of threads, and hence concurrent connections, that an API gate-
way can have.
 The other approach is to use the asynchronous (nonblocking) I/O model . In this
model, a single event loop thread dispatches I/O requests to event handlers. You have
a variety of asynchronous I/O technologies to choose from. On the JVM you can use
one of the NIO-based frameworks such as Netty, Vertx, Spring Reactor, or JBoss
Undertow. One popular non-JVM option is NodeJS, a platform built on Chrome’s
JavaScript engine.
 Nonblocking I/O is much more scalable because it doesn’t have the overhead of
using multiple threads. The drawback, though, is that the asynchronous, callback-
based programming model is much more complex. The code is more difficult to
write, understand, and debug. Event handlers must return quickly to avoid blocking
the event loop thread.
 Also, whether using nonblocking I/O has a meaningful overall benefit depends on
the characteristics of the API gateway’s request-processing logic. Netflix had mixed results
when it rewrote Zuul, its edge server, to use NIO (see https://medium.com/netflix-
techblog/zuul-2-the-netflix-journey-to-asynchronous-non-blocking-systems-45947377fb5c).

---

## Page 299

269
The API gateway pattern
On one hand, as you would expect, using NIO reduced the cost of each network con-
nection, due to the fact that there’s no longer a dedicated thread for each one. Also, a
Zuul cluster that ran I/O-intensive logic—such as request routing—had a 25% increase
in throughput and a 25% reduction in CPU utilization. On the other hand, a Zuul clus-
ter that ran CPU-intensive logic—such as decryption and compression—showed no
improvement. 
USE REACTIVE PROGRAMMING ABSTRACTIONS
As mentioned earlier, API composition consists of invoking multiple backend services.
Some backend service requests depend entirely on the client request’s parameters.
Others might depend on the results of other service requests. One approach is for an
API endpoint handler method to call the services in the order determined by the depen-
dencies. For example, the following listing shows the handler for the findOrder()
request that’s written this way. It calls each of the four services, one after the other.
@RestController
public class OrderDetailsController {
@RequestMapping("/order/{orderId}")
public OrderDetails getOrderDetails(@PathVariable String orderId) {
OrderInfo orderInfo = orderService.findOrderById(orderId);
TicketInfo ticketInfo = kitchenService
.findTicketByOrderId(orderId);
DeliveryInfo deliveryInfo = deliveryService
.findDeliveryByOrderId(orderId);
BillInfo billInfo = accountingService
.findBillByOrderId(orderId);
OrderDetails orderDetails =
OrderDetails.makeOrderDetails(orderInfo, ticketInfo,
deliveryInfo, billInfo);
return orderDetails;
}
...
The drawback of calling the services sequentially is that the response time is the sum
of the service response times. In order to minimize response time, the composition
logic should, whenever possible, invoke services concurrently. In this example, there
are no dependencies between the service calls. All services should be invoked concur-
rently, which significantly reduces response time. The challenge is to write concurrent
code that’s maintainable.
 This is because the traditional way to write scalable, concurrent code is to use
callbacks. Asynchronous, event-driven I/O is inherently callback-based. Even a Servlet
Listing 8.1
Fetching the order details by calling the backend services sequentially

---

## Page 300

270
CHAPTER 8
External API patterns
API-based API composer that invokes services concurrently typically uses callbacks. It
could execute requests concurrently by calling ExecutorService.submitCallable().
The problem there is that this method returns a Future, which has a blocking API. A
more scalable approach is for an API composer to call ExecutorService.submit
(Runnable) and for each Runnable to invoke a callback with the outcome of the
request. The callback accumulates results, and once all of them have been received it
sends back the response to the client.
 Writing API composition code using the traditional asynchronous callback approach
quickly leads you to callback hell. The code will be tangled, difficult to understand,
and error prone, especially when composition requires a mixture of parallel and
sequential requests. A much better approach is to write API composition code in a
declarative style using a reactive approach. Examples of reactive abstractions for the
JVM include the following:
Java 8 CompletableFutures
Project Reactor Monos
RxJava (Reactive Extensions for Java) Observables, created by Netflix specifi-
cally to solve this problem in its API gateway
Scala Futures
A NodeJS-based API gateway would use JavaScript promises or RxJS, which is reactive
extensions for JavaScript. Using one of these reactive abstractions will enable you to
write concurrent code that’s simple and easy to understand. Later in this chapter, I
show an example of this style of coding using Project Reactor Monos and version 5 of
the Spring Framework. 
HANDLING PARTIAL FAILURES
As well as being scalable, an API gateway must also be reliable. One way to achieve reli-
ability is to run multiple instances of the gateway behind a load balancer. If one
instance fails, the load balancer will route requests to the other instances.
 Another way to ensure that an API gateway is reliable is to properly handle failed
requests and requests that have unacceptably high latency. When an API gateway
invokes a service, there’s always a chance that the service is slow or unavailable. An API
gateway may wait a very long time, perhaps indefinitely, for a response, which con-
sumes resources and prevents it from sending a response to its client. An outstanding
request to a failed service might even consume a limited, precious resource such as a
thread and ultimately result in the API gateway being unable to handle any other
requests. The solution, as described in chapter 3, is for an API gateway to use the Cir-
cuit breaker pattern when invoking services. 
BEING A GOOD CITIZEN IN THE ARCHITECTURE
In chapter 3 I described patterns for service discovery, and in chapter 11, I cover
patterns for observability. The service discovery patterns enable a service client,
such as an API gateway, to determine the network location of a service instance so
that it can invoke it. The observability patterns enable developers to monitor the

---

## Page 301

271
Implementing an API gateway
behavior of an application and troubleshoot problems. An API gateway, like other ser-
vices in the architecture, must implement the patterns that have been selected for the
architecture. 
8.3
Implementing an API gateway
Let’s now look at how to implement an API gateway. As mentioned earlier, the respon-
sibilities of an API gateway are as follows:
Request routing—Routes requests to services using criteria such as HTTP request
method and path. The API gateway must route using the HTTP request method
when the application has one or more CQRS query services. As discussed in
chapter 7, in such an architecture commands and queries are handled by sepa-
rate services.
API composition—Implements a GET REST endpoint using the API composition
pattern, described in chapter 7. The request handler combines the results of
invoking multiple services.
Edge functions—Most notable among these is authentication.
Protocol translation—Translates between client-friendly protocols and the client-
unfriendly protocols used by services.
Being a good citizen in the application’s architecture.
There are a couple of different ways to implement an API gateway:
Using an off-the-shelf API gateway product/service—This option requires little or no
development but is the least flexible. For example, an off-the-shelf API gateway
typically does not support API composition
Developing your own API gateway using either an API gateway framework or a web frame-
work as the starting point—This is the most flexible approach, though it requires
some development effort.
Let’s look at these options, starting with using an off-the-shelf API gateway product or
service.
8.3.1
Using an off-the-shelf API gateway product/service
Several off-the-self services and products implement API gateway features. Let’s first
look at a couple of services that are provided by AWS. After that, I’ll discuss some
products that you can download, configure, and run yourself.
AWS API GATEWAY
The AWS API gateway, one of the many services provided by Amazon Web Services, is
a service for deploying and managing APIs. An AWS API gateway API is a set of REST
resources, each of which supports one or more HTTP methods. You configure the API
gateway to route each (Method, Resource) to a backend service. A backend service is
either an AWS Lambda Function, described later in chapter 12, an application-
defined HTTP service, or an AWS service. If necessary, you can configure the API

---

## Page 302

272
CHAPTER 8
External API patterns
gateway to transform request and response using a template-based mechanism. The
AWS API gateway can also authenticate requests.
 The AWS API gateway fulfills some of the requirements for an API gateway that I
listed earlier. The API gateway is provided by AWS, so you’re not responsible for instal-
lation and operations. You configure the API gateway, and AWS handles everything
else, including scaling.
 Unfortunately, the AWS API gateway has several drawbacks and limitations that
cause it to not fulfill other requirements. It doesn’t support API composition, so you’d
need to implement API composition in the backend services. The AWS API gateway
only supports HTTP(S) with a heavy emphasis on JSON. It only supports the Server-
side discovery pattern, described in chapter 3. An application will typically use an AWS
Elastic Load Balancer to load balance requests across a set of EC2 instances or ECS
containers. Despite these limitations, unless you need API composition, the AWS API
gateway is a good implementation of the API gateway pattern. 
AWS APPLICATION LOAD BALANCER
Another AWS service that provides API gateway-like functionality is the AWS Applica-
tion Load Balancer, which is a load balancer for HTTP, HTTPS, WebSocket, and
HTTP/2 (https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/aws/new-aws-application-load-balancer/).
When configuring an Application Load Balancer, you define routing rules that route
requests to backend services, which must be running on AWS EC2 instances.
 Like the AWS API gateway, the AWS Application Load Balancer meets some of the
requirements for an API gateway. It implements basic routing functionality. It’s hosted,
so you’re not responsible for installation or operations. Unfortunately, it’s quite lim-
ited. It doesn’t implement HTTP method-based routing. Nor does it implement API
composition or authentication. As a result, the AWS Application Load Balancer
doesn’t meet the requirements for an API gateway. 
USING AN API GATEWAY PRODUCT
Another option is to use an API gateway product such as Kong or Traefik . These are
open source packages that you install and operate yourself. Kong is based on the
NGINX HTTP server, and Traefik is written in GoLang. Both products let you config-
ure flexible routing rules that use the HTTP method, headers, and path to select the
backend service. Kong lets you configure plugins that implement edge functions such
as authentication. Traefik can even integrate with some service registries, described in
chapter 3.
 Although these products implement edge functions and powerful routing capabil-
ities, they have some drawbacks. You must install, configure, and operate them your-
self. They don’t support API composition. And if you want the API gateway to perform
API composition, you must develop your own API gateway.

---

## Page 303

273
Implementing an API gateway
8.3.2
Developing your own API gateway
Developing an API gateway isn’t particularly difficult. It’s basically a web application
that proxies requests to other services. You can build one using your favorite web
framework. There are, however, two key design problems that you’ll need to solve:
Implementing a mechanism for defining routing rules in order to minimize the
complex coding
Correctly implementing the HTTP proxying behavior, including how HTTP
headers are handled
Consequently, a better starting point for developing an API gateway is to use a frame-
work designed for that purpose. Its built-in functionality significantly reduces the
amount of code you need to write.
 We’ll take a look at Netflix Zuul, an open source project by Netflix, and then con-
sider the Spring Cloud Gateway, an open source project from Pivotal.
USING NETFLIX ZUUL
Netflix developed the Zuul framework to implement edge functions such as routing,
rate limiting, and authentication (https://github.com/Netflix/zuul). The Zuul frame-
work uses the concept of filters, reusable request interceptors that are similar to servlet
filters or NodeJS Express middleware. Zuul handles an HTTP request by assembling a
chain of applicable filters that then transform the request, invoke backend services,
and transform the response before it’s sent back to the client. Although you can use
Zuul directly, using Spring Cloud Zuul, an open source project from Pivotal, is far eas-
ier. Spring Cloud Zuul builds on Zuul and through convention-over-configuration
makes developing a Zuul-based server remarkably easy.
 Zuul handles the routing and edge functionality. You can extend Zuul by defining
Spring MVC controllers that implement API composition. But a major limitation of
Zuul is that it can only implement path-based routing. For example, it’s incapable of
routing GET /orders to one service and POST /orders to a different service. Conse-
quently, Zuul doesn’t support the query architecture described in chapter 7. 
ABOUT SPRING CLOUD GATEWAY
None of the options I’ve described so far meet all the requirements. In fact, I had
given up in my search for an API gateway framework and had started developing an
API gateway based on Spring MVC. But then I discovered the Spring Cloud Gate-
way project (https://cloud.spring.io/spring-cloud-gateway/). It’s an API gateway
framework built on top of several frameworks, including Spring Framework 5,
Spring Boot 2, and Spring Webflux, which is a reactive web framework that's part of
Spring Framework 5 and built on Project Reactor. Project Reactor is an NIO-based
reactive framework for the JVM that provides the Mono abstraction used a little
later in this chapter.

---

## Page 304

274
CHAPTER 8
External API patterns
 Spring Cloud Gateway provides a simple yet comprehensive way to do the following:
Route requests to backend services.
Implement request handlers that perform API composition.
Handle edge functions such as authentication.
Figure 8.8 shows the key parts of an API gateway built using this framework.
The API gateway consists of the following packages:

ApiGatewayMain package—Defines the Main program for the API gateway.
One or more API packages—An API package implements a set of API endpoints.
For example, the Orders package implements the Order-related API endpoints.
Proxy package—Consists of proxy classes that are used by the API packages to
invoke the services.
«@SpringBootApplication»
ApiGatewayApplication
«@Bean»
orderProxyRouting
«@Bean»
orderHandlerRouting
GET/orders/{orderId}
=>
OrderHandlers::getOrderDetails
orders*
=>
http://orderservice
mono<ServerResponse>
getOrderDetails(ServerRequest){
...
}
mono<OrderInfo>
ﬁndOrderById()(orderId){
...WebClient
.get()
.url("http://order-service/..."}
}
static void main(String[]args){
...
}
Remote proxies«package»
Orders«API package»
«proxy»
....
«proxy»
DeliveryService
ﬁndDeliveryByOrder()
«proxy»
OrderService
ﬁndOrderById()
Order handlers
Spring Cloud Gateway
Spring 5
getOrderDetails()
Spring webFlux
Project reactor
«Spring Conﬁguration»OrderConﬁguration
Figure 8.8
The architecture of an API gateway built using Spring Cloud Gateway

---

## Page 305

275
Implementing an API gateway
The OrderConfiguration class defines the Spring beans responsible for routing
Order-related requests. A routing rule can match against some combination of the
HTTP method, the headers, and the path. The orderProxyRoutes @Bean defines rules
that map API operations to backend service URLs. For example, it routes paths begin-
ning with /orders to the Order Service.
 The orderHandlers @Bean defines rules that override those defined by order-
ProxyRoutes. These rules map API operations to handler methods, which are the
Spring WebFlux equivalent of Spring MVC controller methods. For example, order-
Handlers maps the operation GET /orders/{orderId} to the OrderHandlers::get-
OrderDetails() method.
 The OrderHandlers class implements various request handler methods, such as
OrderHandlers::getOrderDetails(). This method uses API composition to fetch the
order details (described earlier). The handle methods invoke backend services using
remote proxy classes, such as OrderService. This class defines methods for invoking
the OrderService.
 Let’s take a look at the code, starting with the OrderConfiguration class. 
THE ORDERCONFIGURATION CLASS
The OrderConfiguration class, shown in listing 8.2, is a Spring @Configuration class.
It defines the Spring @Beans that implement the /orders endpoints. The order-
ProxyRouting and orderHandlerRouting @Beans use the Spring WebFlux routing
DSL to define the request routing. The orderHandlers @Bean implements the request
handlers that perform API composition.
@Configuration
@EnableConfigurationProperties(OrderDestinations.class)
public class OrderConfiguration {
@Bean
public RouteLocator orderProxyRouting(OrderDestinations orderDestinations) {
return Routes.locator()
.route("orders")
.uri(orderDestinations.orderServiceUrl)
.predicate(path("/orders").or(path("/orders/*")))
  
.and()
...
.build();
}
@Bean
public RouterFunction<ServerResponse>
orderHandlerRouting(OrderHandlers orderHandlers) {
return RouterFunctions.route(GET("/orders/{orderId}"),
  
orderHandlers::getOrderDetails);
}
Listing 8.2
The Spring @Beans that implement the /orders endpoints
By default, route all requests whose
path begins with /orders to the URL
orderDestinations.orderServiceUrl.
Route a GET 
/orders/{orderId} 
to orderHandlers::
getOrderDetails.

---

## Page 306

276
CHAPTER 8
External API patterns
@Bean
public OrderHandlers orderHandlers(OrderService orderService,
KitchenService kitchenService,
DeliveryService deliveryService,
AccountingService accountingService) {
return new OrderHandlers(orderService, kitchenService,
      
deliveryService, accountingService);
}
}
OrderDestinations, shown in the following listing, is a Spring @Configuration-
Properties class that enables the externalized configuration of backend service URLs.
@ConfigurationProperties(prefix = "order.destinations")
public class OrderDestinations {
@NotNull
public String orderServiceUrl;
public String getOrderServiceUrl() {
return orderServiceUrl;
}
public void setOrderServiceUrl(String orderServiceUrl) {
this.orderServiceUrl = orderServiceUrl;
}
...
}
You can, for example, specify the URL of the Order Service either as the order
.destinations.orderServiceUrl property in a properties file or as an operating sys-
tem environment variable, ORDER_DESTINATIONS_ORDER_SERVICE_URL. 
THE ORDERHANDLERS CLASS
The OrderHandlers class, shown in the following listing, defines the request handler
methods that implement custom behavior, including API composition. The getOrder-
Details() method, for example, performs API composition to retrieve information
about an order. This class is injected with several proxy classes that make requests to
backend services.
public class OrderHandlers {
private OrderService orderService;
private KitchenService kitchenService;
private DeliveryService deliveryService;
private AccountingService accountingService;
Listing 8.3
The externalized configuration of backend service URLs
Listing 8.4
The OrderHandlers class implements custom request-handling logic.
The @Bean, which implements the
custom request-handling logic

---

## Page 307

277
Implementing an API gateway
public OrderHandlers(OrderService orderService,
KitchenService kitchenService,
DeliveryService deliveryService,
AccountingService accountingService) {
this.orderService = orderService;
this.kitchenService = kitchenService;
this.deliveryService = deliveryService;
this.accountingService = accountingService;
}
public Mono<ServerResponse> getOrderDetails(ServerRequest serverRequest) {
String orderId = serverRequest.pathVariable("orderId");
Mono<OrderInfo> orderInfo = orderService.findOrderById(orderId);
Mono<Optional<TicketInfo>> ticketInfo =
kitchenService
.findTicketByOrderId(orderId)
.map(Optional::of)
      
.onErrorReturn(Optional.empty());
  
Mono<Optional<DeliveryInfo>> deliveryInfo =
deliveryService
.findDeliveryByOrderId(orderId)
.map(Optional::of)
.onErrorReturn(Optional.empty());
Mono<Optional<BillInfo>> billInfo = accountingService
.findBillByOrderId(orderId)
.map(Optional::of)
.onErrorReturn(Optional.empty());
Mono<Tuple4<OrderInfo, Optional<TicketInfo>,
  
Optional<DeliveryInfo>, Optional<BillInfo>>> combined =
Mono.when(orderInfo, ticketInfo, deliveryInfo, billInfo);
Mono<OrderDetails> orderDetails =
               
combined.map(OrderDetails::makeOrderDetails);
return orderDetails.flatMap(person -> ServerResponse.ok()   
.contentType(MediaType.APPLICATION_JSON)
.body(fromObject(person)));
}
}
The getOrderDetails() method implements API composition to fetch the order
details. It’s written in a scalable, reactive style using the Mono abstraction , which is pro-
vided by Project Reactor. A Mono, which is a richer kind of Java 8 CompletableFuture,
contains the outcome of an asynchronous operation that’s either a value or an
exception. It has a rich API for transforming and combining the values returned by
asynchronous operations. You can use Monos to write concurrent code in a style that’s
Transform a TicketInfo into 
an Optional<TicketInfo>.
If the service invocation failed, 
return Optional.empty().
Combine the four 
values into a single 
value, a Tuple4.
Transform the Tuple4 
into an OrderDetails.
Transform the
OrderDetails into
a ServerResponse.

---

## Page 308

278
CHAPTER 8
External API patterns
simple and easy to understand. In this example, the getOrderDetails() method
invokes the four services in parallel and combines the results to create an Order-
Details object.
 The getOrderDetails() method takes a ServerRequest, which is the Spring Web-
Flux representation of an HTTP request, as a parameter and does the following:
1
It extracts the orderId from the path.
2
It invokes the four services asynchronously via their proxies, which return Monos.
In order to improve availability, getOrderDetails() treats the results of all ser-
vices except the OrderService as optional. If a Mono returned by an optional
service contains an exception, the call to onErrorReturn() transforms it into a
Mono containing an empty Optional.
3
It combines the results asynchronously using Mono.when(), which returns a
Mono<Tuple4> containing the four values.
4
It transforms the Mono<Tuple4> into a Mono<OrderDetails> by calling Order-
Details::makeOrderDetails.
5
It transforms the OrderDetails into a ServerResponse, which is the Spring
WebFlux representation of the JSON/HTTP response.
As you can see, because getOrderDetails() uses Monos, it concurrently invokes the
services and combines the results without using messy, difficult-to-read callbacks. Let’s
take a look at one of the service proxies that return the results of a service API call
wrapped in a Mono. 
THE ORDERSERVICE CLASS
The OrderService class, shown in the following listing, is a remote proxy for the Order
Service. It invokes the Order Service using a WebClient, which is the Spring Web-
Flux reactive HTTP client.
@Service
public class OrderService {
private OrderDestinations orderDestinations;
private WebClient client;
public OrderService(OrderDestinations orderDestinations, WebClient client)
{
this.orderDestinations = orderDestinations;
this.client = client;
}
public Mono<OrderInfo> findOrderById(String orderId) {
Mono<ClientResponse> response = client
.get()
Listing 8.5
OrderService class—a remote proxy for Order Service

---

## Page 309

279
Implementing an API gateway
.uri(orderDestinations.orderServiceUrl + "/orders/{orderId}",
orderId)
.exchange();
    
return response.flatMap(resp -> resp.bodyToMono(OrderInfo.class));  
}
}
The findOrder() method retrieves the OrderInfo for an order. It uses the WebClient
to make the HTTP request to the Order Service and deserializes the JSON response
to an OrderInfo. WebClient has a reactive API, and the response is wrapped in a Mono.
The findOrder() method uses flatMap() to transform the Mono<ClientResponse>
into a Mono<OrderInfo>. As the name suggests, the bodyToMono() method returns the
response body as a Mono. 
THE APIGATEWAYAPPLICATION CLASS
The ApiGatewayApplication class, shown in the following listing, implements the API
gateway’s main() method. It’s a standard Spring Boot main class.
@SpringBootConfiguration
@EnableAutoConfiguration
@EnableGateway
@Import(OrdersConfiguration.class)
public class ApiGatewayApplication {
public static void main(String[] args) {
SpringApplication.run(ApiGatewayApplication.class, args);
}
}
The @EnableGateway annotation imports the Spring configuration for the Spring
Cloud Gateway framework.
 Spring Cloud Gateway is an excellent framework for implementing an API gateway.
It enables you to configure basic proxying using a simple, concise routing rules DSL.
It’s also straightforward to route requests to handler methods that perform API com-
position and protocol translation. Spring Cloud Gateway is built using the scalable,
reactive Spring Framework 5 and Project Reactor frameworks. But there’s another
appealing option for developing your own API gateway: GraphQL, a framework that
provides graph-based query language. Let’s look at how that works. 
8.3.3
Implementing an API gateway using GraphQL
Imagine that you’re responsible for implementing the FTGO’s API Gateway’s GET
/orders/{orderId} endpoint, which returns the order details. On the surface, imple-
menting this endpoint might appear to be simple. But as described in section 8.1, this
endpoint retrieves data from multiple services. Consequently, you need to use the
Listing 8.6
The main() method for the API gateway
Invoke the
service.
Convert the response
body to an OrderInfo.

---

## Page 310

280
CHAPTER 8
External API patterns
API composition pattern and write code that invokes the services and combines
the results.
 Another challenge, mentioned earlier, is that different clients need slightly differ-
ent data. For example, unlike the mobile application, the desktop SPA application dis-
plays your rating for the order. One way to tailor the data returned by the endpoint, as
described in chapter 3, is to give the client the ability to specify the data they need. An
endpoint can, for example, support query parameters such as the expand parameter,
which specifies the related resources to return, and the field parameter, which speci-
fies the fields of each resource to return. The other option is to define multiple ver-
sions of this endpoint as part of applying the Backends for frontends pattern. This is a
lot of work for just one of the many API endpoints that the FTGO’s API Gateway
needs to implement.
 Implementing an API gateway with a REST API that supports a diverse set of cli-
ents well is time consuming. Consequently, you may want to consider using a graph-
based API framework, such as GraphQL, that’s designed to support efficient data
fetching. The key idea with graph-based API frameworks is that, as figure 8.9 shows,
the server’s API consists of a graph-based schema. The graph-based schema defines a
set of nodes (types), which have properties (fields) and relationships with other nodes.
The client retrieves data by executing a query that specifies the required data in terms
of the graph’s nodes and their properties and relationships. As a result, a client can
retrieve the data it needs in a single round-trip to the API gateway.
Graph-based API technology has a couple of important benefits. It gives clients con-
trol over what data is returned. Consequently, developing a single API that’s flexible
Consumer
Consumer
Restaurant
Delivery
Consumer Service
API gateway
Graph-based API framework
Graph schema
Order
Order Service
Restaurant
Restaurant Service
Delivery
Delivery Service
Order
Schema
=>
Service
mapping
Client
Query
Query
Query
Query
Query
Figure 8.9
The API gateway’s API consists of a graph-based schema that’s mapped to the services. A client 
issues a query that retrieves multiple graph nodes. The graph-based API framework executes the query by 
retrieving data from one or more services.

---

## Page 311

281
Implementing an API gateway
enough to support diverse clients becomes feasible. Another benefit is that even though
the API is much more flexible, this approach significantly reduces the development
effort. That’s because you write the server-side code using a query execution frame-
work that’s designed to support API composition and projections. It’s as if, rather than
force clients to retrieve data via stored procedures that you need to write and main-
tain, you let them execute queries against the underlying database.
This section talks about how to develop an API gateway using Apollo GraphQL. I’m
only going to cover a few of the key features of GraphQL and Apollo GraphQL. For
more information, you should consult the GraphQL and Apollo GraphQL docu-
mentation.
 The GraphQL-based API gateway, shown in figure 8.10, is written in JavaScript
using the NodeJS Express web framework and the Apollo GraphQL server. The key
parts of the design are as follows:
GraphQL schema—The GraphQL schema defines the server-side data model and
the queries it supports.
Resolver functions—The resolve functions map elements of the schema to the
various backend services.
Proxy classes—The proxy classes invoke the FTGO application’s services.
There’s also a small amount of glue code that integrates the GraphQL server with the
Express web framework. Let’s look at each part, starting with the GraphQL schema.
Schema-driven API technologies
The two most popular graph-based API technologies are GraphQL (http://graphql.org)
and Netflix Falcor (http://netflix.github.io/falcor/). Netflix Falcor models server-side
data as a virtual JSON object graph. The Falcor client retrieves data from a Falcor
server by executing a query that retrieves properties of that JSON object. The client
can also update properties. In the Falcor server, the properties of the object graph
are mapped to backend data sources, such as services with REST APIs. The server
handles a request to set or get properties by invoking one or more backend data
sources.
GraphQL, developed by Facebook and released in 2015, is another popular graph-
based API technology. It models the server-side data as a graph of objects that have
fields and references to other objects. The object graph is mapped to backend data
sources. GraphQL clients can execute queries that retrieve data and mutations that
create and update data. Unlike Netflix Falcor, which is an implementation, GraphQL
is a standard, with clients and servers available for a variety of languages, including
NodeJS, Java, and Scala.
Apollo GraphQL is a popular JavaScript/NodeJS implementation (www.apollographql
.com). It’s a platform that includes a GraphQL server and client. Apollo GraphQL
implements some powerful extensions to the GraphQL specification, such as sub-
scriptions that push changed data to the client.

---

## Page 312

282
CHAPTER 8
External API patterns
DEFINING A GRAPHQL SCHEMA
A GraphQL API is centered around a schema, which consists of a collection of types
that define the structure of the server-side data model and the operations, such as
queries, that a client can perform. GraphQL has several different kinds of types. The
example code in this section uses just two kinds of types: object types, which are the
type Query{
orders(consumerId:Int!): [Order]
order(orderId : int!): Order
consumer(consumerId : int!): Consumer
}
type Order {
orderId: ID,
consumerId: Int,
consumer: Consumer
restaurant: Restaurant
deliveryInfo : DeliveryInfo
...
const resolvers = {
Query:{
orders: resolveOrders,
order: resolveOrder,
...
},
Order:{
consumer: resolveOrderConsumer,
restaurant: resolveOrderRestaurant,
deliveryInfo: resolveOrderDeliveryInfo
},
...
function resolveOrder(_. {orderId}, context){
return context.orderServiceProxy.ﬁndOrder(orderI
d);
}
function resolveOrderDeliveryInfo({orderId}, args,
context) {
return context.deliveryServiceProxy.ﬁndDeliveryF
orOrder(orderId);
}
Apollo graphQL engine
ConsumerServiceProxy
OrderServiceProxy
RestaurantServiceProxy
DeliveryServiceProxy
Consumer Service
invokes
invokes
invokes
invokes
Order Service
Restaurant Service
Delivery Service
Express web framework
Apollo
graphQL
client
FTGO API gateway
http://.../graphql?query={orders(consumerId:1){orde
rId,restaurant{id}}}
Figure 8.10
The design of the GraphQL-based FTGO API Gateway

---

## Page 313

283
Implementing an API gateway
primary way of defining the data model, and enums, which are similar to Java enums.
An object type has a name and a collection of typed, named fields. A field can be a sca-
lar type, such as a number, string, or enum; a list of scalar types; a reference to another
object type; or a collection of references to another object type. Despite resembling a
field of a traditional object-oriented class, a GraphQL field is conceptually a function
that returns a value. It can have arguments, which enable a GraphQL client to tailor
the data the function returns.
 GraphQL also uses fields to define the queries supported by the schema. You
define the schema’s queries by declaring an object type, which by convention is called
Query. Each field of the Query object is a named query, which has an optional set of
parameters, and a return type. I found this way of defining queries a little confusing
when I first encountered it, but it helps to keep in mind that a GraphQL field is a
function. It will become even clearer when we look at how fields are connected to the
backend data sources.
 The following listing shows part of the schema for the GraphQL-based FTGO API
gateway. It defines several object types. Most of the object types correspond to the
FTGO application’s Consumer, Order, and Restaurant entities. It also has a Query object
type that defines the schema’s queries.
type Query {
   
orders(consumerId : Int!): [Order]
order(orderId : Int!): Order
consumer(consumerId : Int!): Consumer
}
type Consumer {
id: ID
  
firstName: String
lastName: String
orders: [Order]
     
}
type Order {
orderId: ID,
consumerId : Int,
consumer: Consumer
restaurant: Restaurant
deliveryInfo : DeliveryInfo
...
}
type Restaurant {
id: ID
name: String
...
}
Listing 8.7
The GraphQL schema for the FTGO API gateway
Defines the queries 
that a client can 
execute
The unique ID 
for a Consumer
A consumer has 
a list of orders.

---

## Page 314

284
CHAPTER 8
External API patterns
type DeliveryInfo {
status : DeliveryStatus
estimatedDeliveryTime : Int
assignedCourier :String
}
enum DeliveryStatus {
PREPARING
READY_FOR_PICKUP
PICKED_UP
DELIVERED
}
Despite having a different syntax, the Consumer, Order, Restaurant, and Delivery-
Info object types are structurally similar to the corresponding Java classes. One differ-
ence is the ID type, which represents a unique identifier.
 This schema defines three queries:

orders()—Returns the Orders for the specified Consumer

order()—Returns the specified Order

consumer()—Returns the specified Consumer
These queries may seem not different from the equivalent REST endpoints, but
GraphQL gives the client tremendous control over the data that’s returned. To under-
stand why, let’s look at how a client executes GraphQL queries. 
EXECUTING GRAPHQL QUERIES
The principal benefit of using GraphQL is that its query language gives the client
incredible control over the returned data. A client executes a query by making a
request containing a query document to the server. In the simple case, a query docu-
ment specifies the name of the query, the argument values, and the fields of the result
object to return. Here’s a simple query that retrieves firstName and lastName of the
consumer with a particular ID:
query {
consumer(consumerId:1)
  
{
  
firstName
lastName
}
}
This query returns those fields of the specified Consumer.
 Here’s a more elaborate query that returns a consumer, their orders, and the ID
and name of each order’s restaurant:
query {
consumer(consumerId:1)
{
id
firstName
lastName
Specifies the query called consumer, 
which fetches a consumer
The fields of the 
Consumer to return

---

## Page 315

285
Implementing an API gateway
orders {
orderId
restaurant {
id
name
}
deliveryInfo {
estimatedDeliveryTime
name
}
}
}
}
This query tells the server to return more than just the fields of the Consumer. It
retrieves the consumer’s Orders and each Order’s restaurant. As you can see, a
GraphQL client can specify exactly the data to return, including the fields of transi-
tively related objects.
 The query language is more flexible than it might first appear. That’s because a
query is a field of the Query object, and a query document specifies which of those fields
the server should return. These simple examples retrieve a single field, but a query doc-
ument can execute multiple queries by specifying multiple fields. For each field, the
query document supplies the field’s arguments and specifies what fields of the result
object it’s interested in. Here’s a query that retrieves two different consumers:
query {
c1: consumer (consumerId:1)
{ id, firstName, lastName}
c2: consumer (consumerId:2)
{ id, firstName, lastName}
}
In this query document, c1 and c2 are what GraphQL calls aliases. They’re used to dis-
tinguish between the two Consumers in the result, which would otherwise both be
called consumer. This example retrieves two objects of the same type, but a client
could retrieve several objects of different types.
 A GraphQL schema defines the shape of the data and the supported queries. To
be useful, it has to be connected to the source of the data. Let’s look at how to do that. 
CONNECTING THE SCHEMA TO THE DATA
When the GraphQL server executes a query, it must retrieve the requested data from
one or more data stores. In the case of the FTGO application, the GraphQL server
must invoke the APIs of the services that own the data. You associate a GraphQL
schema with the data sources by attaching resolver functions to the fields of the object
types defined by the schema. The GraphQL server implements the API composition
pattern by invoking resolver functions to retrieve the data, first for the top-level query,
and then recursively for the fields of the result object or objects.
 The details of how resolver functions are associated with the schema depend on
which GraphQL server you are using. Listing 8.8 shows how to define the resolvers

---

## Page 316

286
CHAPTER 8
External API patterns
when using the Apollo GraphQL server. You create a doubly nested JavaScript object.
Each top-level property corresponds to an object type, such as Query and Order. Each
second-level property, such as Order.consumer, defines a field’s resolver function.
const resolvers = {
Query: {
orders: resolveOrders,
consumer: resolveConsumer,
order: resolveOrder
},
Order: {
consumer: resolveOrderConsumer,
  
restaurant: resolveOrderRestaurant,
deliveryInfo: resolveOrderDeliveryInfo
...
};
A resolver function has three parameters:
Object—For a top-level query field, such as resolveOrders, object is a root
object that’s usually ignored by the resolver function. Otherwise, object is the
value returned by the resolver for the parent object. For example, the resolver
function for the Order.consumer field is passed the value returned by the Order’s
resolver function.
Query arguments—These are supplied by the query document.
Context—Global state of the query execution that’s accessible by all resolvers. It’s
used, for example, to pass user information and dependencies to the resolvers.
A resolver function might invoke a single service or it might implement the API com-
position pattern and retrieve data from multiple services. An Apollo GraphQL server
resolver function returns a Promise, which is JavaScript’s version of Java’s Completable-
Future. The promise contains the object (or a list of objects) that the resolver func-
tion retrieved from the data store. GraphQL engine includes the return value in the
result object.
 Let’s look at a couple of examples. Here’s the resolveOrders() function, which is
the resolver for the orders query:
function resolveOrders(_, { consumerId }, context) {
return context.orderServiceProxy.findOrders(consumerId);
}
This function obtains the OrderServiceProxy from the context and invokes it to
fetch a consumer’s orders. It ignores its first parameter. It passes the consumerId argu-
ment, provided by the query document, to OrderServiceProxy.findOrders(). The
findOrders() method retrieves the consumer’s orders from OrderHistoryService.
Listing 8.8
Attaching the resolver functions to fields of the GraphQL schema
The resolver for 
the orders query
The resolver for 
the consumer field 
of an Order

---

## Page 317

287
Implementing an API gateway
 Here’s the resolveOrderRestaurant() function, which is the resolver for the
Order.restaurant field that retrieves an order’s restaurant:
function resolveOrderRestaurant({restaurantId}, args, context) {
return context.restaurantServiceProxy.findRestaurant(restaurantId);
}
Its first parameter is Order. It invokes RestaurantServiceProxy.findRestaurant()
with the Order’s restaurantId, which was provided by resolveOrders().
 GraphQL uses a recursive algorithm to execute the resolver functions. First, it exe-
cutes the resolver function for the top-level query specified by the Query document.
Next, for each object returned by the query, it iterates through the fields specified in
the Query document. If a field has a resolver, it invokes the resolver with the object
and the arguments from the Query document. It then recurses on the object or
objects returned by that resolver.
 Figure 8.11 shows how this algorithm executes the query that retrieves a consumer’s
orders and each order’s delivery information and restaurant. First, the GraphQL engine
invokes resolveConsumer(), which retrieves Consumer. Next, it invokes resolve-
ConsumerOrders(), which is the resolver for the Consumer.orders field that returns
the consumer’s orders. The GraphQL engine then iterates through Orders, invok-
ing the resolvers for the Order.restaurant and Order.deliveryInfo fields.
The result of executing the resolvers is a Consumer object populated with data retrieved
from multiple services.
 Let’s now look at how to optimize the executing of resolvers by using batching and
caching. 
Resolver functions
Schema
Query document
type Query{
consumer(consumerId:int!): Consumer
}
type Order {
...
restaurant: Restaurant
deliveryInfo : DeliveryInfo
...
query{
consumer(consumerId:1){
id
ﬁrstName
lastName
orders{
orderId
restaurant{
id
name
}
deliveryInfo{
estimatedDeliveryTime
name
}
}
}
}
consumer = resolveConsumer(..., 1)
orders = resolveConsumerOrders(consumer)
resolveOrderRestaurant(order, ...)
resolveOrderDeliveryInfo(order)
Query arguments passed to resolver
Figure 8.11
GraphQL executes a query by recursively invoking the resolver functions for the fields specified in 
the Query document. First, it executes the resolver for the query, and then it recursively invokes the resolvers for 
the fields in the result object hierarchy.

---

## Page 318

288
CHAPTER 8
External API patterns
OPTIMIZING LOADING USING BATCHING AND CACHING
GraphQL can potentially execute a large number of resolvers when executing a query.
Because the GraphQL server executes each resolver independently, there’s a risk of
poor performance due to excessive round-trips to the services. Consider, for example,
a query that retrieves a consumer, their orders, and the orders’ restaurants. If there
are N orders, then a simplistic implementation would make one call to Consumer
Service, one call to Order History Service, and then N calls to Restaurant Service.
Even though the GraphQL engine will typically make the calls to Restaurant Service
in parallel, there’s a risk of poor performance. Fortunately, you can use a few tech-
niques to improve performance.
 One important optimization is to use a combination of server-side batching and
caching. Batching turns N calls to a service, such as Restaurant Service, into a sin-
gle call that retrieves a batch of N objects. Caching reuses the result of a previous
fetch of the same object to avoid making an unnecessary duplicate call. The combi-
nation of batching and caching significantly reduces the number of round-trips to
backend services.
 A NodeJS-based GraphQL server can use the DataLoader module to implement
batching and caching (https://github.com/facebook/dataloader). It coalesces loads
that occur within a single execution of the event loop and calls a batch loading func-
tion that you provide. It also caches calls to eliminate duplicate loads. The following list-
ing shows how RestaurantServiceProxy can use DataLoader. The findRestaurant()
method loads a Restaurant via DataLoader.
const DataLoader = require('dataloader');
class RestaurantServiceProxy {
constructor() {
this.dataLoader =
      
new DataLoader(restaurantIds =>
this.batchFindRestaurants(restaurantIds));
}
findRestaurant(restaurantId) {
         
return this.dataLoader.load(restaurantId);
}
batchFindRestaurants(restaurantIds) {
     
...
}
}
RestaurantServiceProxy and, hence, DataLoader are created for each request, so
there’s no possibility of DataLoader mixing together different users’ data.
 Let’s now look at how to integrate the GraphQL engine with a web framework so
that it can be invoked by clients. 
Listing 8.9
Using a DataLoader to optimize calls to Restaurant Service
Create a DataLoader, which uses 
batchFindRestaurants() as the 
batch loading functions.
Load the specified Restaurant 
via the DataLoader.
Load a batch of 
Restaurants.

---

## Page 319

289
Implementing an API gateway
INTEGRATING THE APOLLO GRAPHQL SERVER WITH EXPRESS
The Apollo GraphQL server executes GraphQL queries. In order for clients to invoke
it, you need to integrate it with a web framework. Apollo GraphQL server supports
several web frameworks, including Express, a popular NodeJS web framework.
 Listing 8.10 shows how to use the Apollo GraphQL server in an Express applica-
tion. The key function is graphqlExpress, which is provided by the apollo-server-
express module. It builds an Express request handler that executes GraphQL queries
against a schema. This example configures Express to route requests to the GET
/graphql and POST /graphql endpoints of this GraphQL request handler. It also creates
a GraphQL context containing the proxies, which makes them available to the resolvers.
const {graphqlExpress} = require("apollo-server-express");
const typeDefs = gql`
   
type Query {
orders: resolveOrders,
...
}
type Consumer {
...
const resolvers = {     
Query: {
...
}
}
const schema = makeExecutableSchema({ typeDefs, resolvers });    
const app = express();
function makeContextWithDependencies(req) {      
const orderServiceProxy = new OrderServiceProxy();
const consumerServiceProxy = new ConsumerServiceProxy();
const restaurantServiceProxy = new RestaurantServiceProxy();
...
return {orderServiceProxy, consumerServiceProxy,
restaurantServiceProxy, ...};
}
function makeGraphQLHandler() {
   
return graphqlExpress(req => {
return {schema: schema, context: makeContextWithDependencies(req)}
});
}
app.post('/graphql', bodyParser.json(), makeGraphQLHandler());
  
app.get('/graphql', makeGraphQLHandler());
app.listen(PORT);
Listing 8.10
Integrating the GraphQL server with the Express web framework
Define the GraphQL 
schema.
Define the 
resolvers.
Combine the 
schema with the 
resolvers to create 
an executable 
schema.
Inject repositories into 
the context so they’re 
available to resolvers.
Make an express request handler 
that executes GraphQL queries 
against the executable schema.
Route POST /graphql and GET
/graphql endpoints to the
GraphQL server.

---

## Page 320

290
CHAPTER 8
External API patterns
This example doesn’t handle concerns such as security, but those would be straight-
forward to implement. The API gateway could, for example, authenticate users using
Passport, a NodeJS security framework described in chapter 11. The makeContext-
WithDependencies() function would pass the user information to each repository’s
constructor so that they can propagate the user information to the services.
 Let’s now look at how a client can invoke this server to execute GraphQL queries. 
WRITING A GRAPHQL CLIENT
There are a couple of different ways a client application can invoke the GraphQL
server. Because the GraphQL server has an HTTP-based API, a client application
could use an HTTP library to make requests, such as GET http://localhost:3000/
graphql?query={orders(consumerId:1){orderId,restaurant{id}}}'. It’s easier,
though, to use a GraphQL client library, which takes care of properly formatting
requests and typically provides features such as client-side caching.
 The following listing shows the FtgoGraphQLClient class, which is a simple
GraphQL-based client for the FTGO application. Its constructor instantiates Apollo-
Client, which is provided by the Apollo GraphQL client library. The FtgoGraphQL-
Client class defines a findConsumer() method that uses the client to retrieve the
name of a consumer.
class FtgoGraphQLClient {
constructor(...) {
this.client = new ApolloClient({ ... });
}
findConsumer(consumerId) {
return this.client.query({
variables: { cid: consumerId},
  
query: gql`
query foo($cid : Int!) {
  
consumer(consumerId: $cid)
{
  
id
firstName
lastName
}
} `,
})
}
}
The FtgoGraphQLClient class can define a variety of query methods, such as find-
Consumer(). Each one executes a query that retrieves exactly the data needed by the
client.
Listing 8.11
Using the Apollo GraphQL client to execute queries
Supply the value 
of the $cid.
Define $cid as a 
variable of type Int.
Set the value of 
query parameter 
consumerid to $cid.

---

## Page 321

291
Summary
 This section has barely scratched the surface of GraphQL’s capabilities. I hope I’ve
demonstrated that GraphQL is a very appealing alternative to a more traditional,
REST-based API gateway. It lets you implement an API that’s flexible enough to sup-
port a diverse set of clients. Consequently, you should consider using GraphQL to
implement your API gateway. 
Summary
Your application’s external clients usually access the application’s services via an
API gateway. An API gateway provides each client with a custom API. It’s respon-
sible for request routing, API composition, protocol translation, and implemen-
tation of edge functions such as authentication.
Your application can have a single API gateway or it can use the Backends for
frontends pattern, which defines an API gateway for each type of client. The
main advantage of the Backends for frontends pattern is that it gives the client
teams greater autonomy, because they develop, deploy, and operate their own
API gateway.
There are numerous technologies you can use to implement an API gateway,
including off-the-shelf API gateway products. Alternatively, you can develop
your own API gateway using a framework.
Spring Cloud Gateway is a good, easy-to-use framework for developing an API
gateway. It routes requests using any request attribute, including the method
and the path. Spring Cloud Gateway can route a request either directly to a
backend service or to a custom handler method. It’s built using the scalable,
reactive Spring Framework 5 and Project Reactor frameworks. You can write
your custom request handlers in a reactive style using, for example, Project
Reactor’s Mono abstraction.
GraphQL, a framework that provides graph-based query language, is another
excellent foundation for developing an API Gateway. You write a graph-oriented
schema to describe the server-side data model and its supported queries. You
then map that schema to your services by writing resolvers, which retrieve data.
GraphQL-based clients execute queries against the schema that specify exactly
the data that the server should return. As a result, a GraphQL-based API gate-
way can support diverse clients.

---

## Page 322

292
Testing microservices:
Part 1
FTGO, like many organizations, had adopted a traditional approach to testing. Test-
ing is primarily an activity that happens after development. The FTGO developers
throw their code over a wall to the QA team, who verify that the software works as
expected. What’s more, most of their testing is done manually. Sadly, this approach
to testing is broken—for two reasons:
Manual testing is extremely inefficient—You should never ask a human to do
what a machine can do better. Compared to machines, humans are slow and
can’t work 24/7. You won’t be able to deliver software rapidly and safely if
you rely on manual testing. It’s essential that you write automated tests.
Testing is done far too late in the delivery process—There certainly is a role for tests
that critique an application after it’s been written, but experience has shown
that those tests are insufficient. A much better approach is for developers to
This chapter covers
Effective testing strategies for microservices
Using mocks and stubs to test a software 
element in isolation
Using the test pyramid to determine where to 
focus testing efforts
Unit testing the classes inside a service

---

## Page 323

293
write automated tests as part of development. It improves their productivity
because, for example, they’ll have tests that provide immediate feedback while
editing code.
In this regard, FTGO is a fairly typical organization. The Sauce Labs Testing Trends in
2018 report paints a fairly gloomy picture of the state of test automation (https://
saucelabs.com/resources/white-papers/testing-trends-for-2018). It describes how only
26% of organizations are mostly automated, and a minuscule 3% are fully automated!
 The reliance on manual testing isn’t because of a lack of tooling and frameworks.
For example, JUnit, a popular Java testing framework, was first released in 1998. The
reason for the lack of automated tests is mostly cultural: “Testing is QA’s job,” “It’s not
the best use of a developers’s time,” and so on. It also doesn’t help that developing a
fast-running, yet effective, maintainable test suite is challenging. And, a typical large,
monolithic application is extremely difficult to test.
 One key motivation for using the microservice architecture is, as described in
chapter 2, improving testability. Yet at the same time, the complexity of the microser-
vice architecture demands that you write automated tests. Furthermore, some aspects
of testing microservices are challenging. That’s because we need to verify that services
can interact correctly while minimizing the number of slow, complex, and unreliable
end-to-end-tests that launch many services.
 This chapter is the first of two chapters on testing. It’s an introduction to testing.
Chapter 10 covers more advanced testing concepts. The two chapters are long, but
together they cover testing ideas and techniques that are essential to modern software
development in general, and to the microservice architecture in particular.
 I begin this chapter by describing effective testing strategies for a microservices-
based application. These strategies enable you to be confident that your software
works, while minimizing test complexity and execution time. After that, I describe
how to write one particular kind of test for your services: unit tests. Chapter 10 covers
the other kinds of tests: integration, component, and end-to-end.
 Let’s start by taking a look at testing strategies for microservices.
Why an introduction to testing?
You may be wondering why this chapter includes an introduction to basic testing con-
cepts. If you’re already familiar with concepts such as the test pyramid and the different
types of tests, feel free to speed-read this chapter and move onto the next one, which
focuses on microservices-specific testing topics. But based on my experiences consult-
ing for and training clients all over the world, a fundamental weakness of many software
development organizations is the lack of automated testing. That’s because if you want
to deliver software quickly and reliably, it’s absolutely essential to do automated testing.
It’s the only way to have a short lead time, which is the time it takes to get committed
code into production. Perhaps even more importantly, automated testing is essential
because it forces you to develop a testable application. It’s typically very difficult to
introduce automating testing into an already large, complex application. In other words,
the fast track to monolithic hell is to not write automated tests.

---

## Page 324

294
CHAPTER 9
Testing microservices: Part 1
9.1
Testing strategies for microservice architectures
Let’s say you’ve made a change to FTGO application’s Order Service. Naturally, the
next step is for you to run your code and verify that the change works correctly. One
option is to test the change manually. First, you run Order Service and all its depen-
dencies, which include infrastructure services such as a database and other applica-
tion services. Then you “test” the service by either invoking its API or using the FTGO
application’s UI. The downside of this approach is that it’s a slow, manual way to test
your code.
 A much better option is to have automated tests that you can run during develop-
ment. Your development workflow should be: edit code, run tests (ideally with a single
keystroke), repeat. The fast-running tests quickly tell you whether your changes work
within a few seconds. But how do you write fast-running tests? And are they sufficient
or do you need more comprehensive tests? These are the kind of questions I answer in
this and other sections in this chapter.
 I start this section with an overview of important automated testing concepts. We’ll
look at the purpose of testing and the structure of a typical test. I cover the different
types of tests that you’ll need to write. I also describe the test pyramid, which provides
valuable guidance about where you should focus your testing efforts. After covering
testing concepts, I discuss strategies for testing microservices. We’ll look at the distinct
challenges of testing applications that have a microservice architecture. I describe
techniques you can use to write simpler and faster, yet still-effective, tests for your
microservices.
 Let’s take a look at testing concepts.
9.1.1
Overview of testing
In this chapter, my focus is on automated testing, and I use the term test as shorthand
for automated test. Wikipedia defines a test case, or test, as follows:
A test case is a set of test inputs, execution conditions, and expected results developed for
a particular objective, such as to exercise a particular program path or to verify compliance
with a specific requirement.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Test_case
In other words, the purpose of a test is, as figure 9.1 shows, to verify the behavior of
the System Under Test (SUT). In this definition, system is a fancy term that means the
software element being tested. It might be something as small as a class, as large as the
entire application, or something in between, such as a cluster of classes or an individ-
ual service. A collection of related tests form a test suite.
 Let’s first look at the concept of an automated test. Then I discuss the different
kinds of tests that you’ll need to write. After that, I discuss the test pyramid, which
describes the relative proportions of the different types of tests that you should write.

---

## Page 325

295
Testing strategies for microservice architectures
WRITING AUTOMATED TESTS
Automated tests are usually written using a testing framework. JUnit, for example, is a
popular Java testing framework. Figure 9.2 shows the structure of an automated test.
Each test is implemented by a test method, which belongs to a test class.
An automated test typically consists of four phases (http://xunitpatterns.com/
Four%20Phase%20Test.html):
1
Setup—Initialize the test fixture, which consists of the SUT and its dependen-
cies, to the desired initial state. For example, create the class under test and ini-
tialize it to the state required for it to exhibit the desired behavior.
2
Exercise—Invoke the SUT—for example, invoke a method on the class under test.
3
Verify—Make assertions about the invocation’s outcome and the state of the
SUT. For example, verify the method’s return value and the new state of the class
under test.
System Under
Test (SUT)
Test
Test suite
Veriﬁes behavior of
Figure 9.1
The goal of a test is to 
verify the behavior of the system 
under test. An SUT might be as 
small as a class or as large as an 
entire application.
Test class
Setup
Execute
Verify
Teardown
Test method
Test method
Test runner
SUT
Fixture
Executes
Test method
Figure 9.2
Each automated test is implemented by a test method, which belongs to a test class. A 
test consists of four phases: setup, which initializes the test fixture, which is everything required to 
run the test; execute, which invokes the SUT; verify, which verifies the outcome of the test; and 
teardown, which cleans up the test fixture.

---

## Page 326

296
CHAPTER 9
Testing microservices: Part 1
4
Teardown—Clean up the test fixture, if necessary. Many tests omit this phase,
but some types of database test will, for example, roll back a transaction initi-
ated by the setup phase.
In order to reduce code duplication and simplify tests, a test class might have setup
methods that are run before a test method, and teardown methods that are run after-
wards. A test suite is a set of test classes. The tests are executed by a test runner. 
TESTING USING MOCKS AND STUBS
An SUT often has dependencies. The trouble with dependencies is that they can com-
plicate and slow down tests. For example, the OrderController class invokes Order-
Service, which ultimately depends on numerous other application services and
infrastructure services. It wouldn’t be practical to test the OrderController class by
running a large portion of the system. We need a way to test an SUT in isolation.
 The solution, as figure 9.3 shows, is to replace the SUT’s dependencies with test
doubles. A test double is an object that simulates the behavior of the dependency.
There are two types of test doubles: stubs and mocks. The terms stubs  and mocks  are
often used interchangeably, although they have slightly different behavior. A stub is a
test double that returns values to the SUT. A mock is a test double that a test uses to ver-
ify that the SUT correctly invokes a dependency. Also, a mock is often a stub.
 Later on in this chapter, you’ll see examples of test doubles in action. For example,
section 9.2.5 shows how to test the OrderController class in isolation by using a test
double for the OrderService class. In that example, the OrderService test double is
implemented using Mockito, a popular mock object framework for Java. Chapter 10
shows how to test Order Service using test doubles for the other services that it invokes.
Those test doubles respond to command messages sent by Order Service.
 Let’s now look at the different types of tests. 
Slow, complex
test
Tests
Replaced with
Tests
System Under
Test (SUT)
Dependency
Faster, simpler
test
System Under
Test (SUT)
Test double
Figure 9.3
Replacing a dependency with a test double enables the SUT to 
be tested in isolation. The test is simpler and faster.

---

## Page 327

297
Testing strategies for microservice architectures
THE DIFFERENT TYPES OF TESTS
There are many different types of tests. Some tests, such as performance tests and
usability tests, verify that the application satisfies its quality of service requirements. In
this chapter, I focus on automated tests that verify the functional aspects of the appli-
cation or service. I describe how to write four different types of tests:
Unit tests—Test a small part of a service, such as a class.
Integration tests—Verify that a service can interact with infrastructure services
such as databases and other application services.
Component tests—Acceptance tests for an individual service.
End-to-end tests—Acceptance tests for the entire application.
They differ primarily in scope. At one end of the spectrum are unit tests, which verify
behavior of the smallest meaningful program element. For an object-oriented lan-
guage such as Java, that’s a class. At the other end of the spectrum are end-to-end
tests, which verify the behavior of an entire application. In the middle are component
tests, which test individual services. Integration tests, as you’ll see in the next chapter,
have a relatively small scope, but they’re more complex than pure unit tests. Scope is
only one way of characterizing tests. Another way is to use the test quadrant.
USING THE TEST QUADRANT TO CATEGORIZE TESTS
A good way to categorize tests is Brian Marick’s test quadrant (www.exampler.com/old-
blog/2003/08/21/#agile-testing-project-1). The test quadrant, shown in figure 9.4,
categorizes tests along two dimensions:
Whether the test is business facing or technology facing—A business-facing test is
described using the terminology of a domain expert, whereas a technology-facing
test is described using the terminology of developers and the implementation.
Whether the goal of the test is to support programming or critique the application—Devel-
opers use tests that support programming as part of their daily work. Tests that
critique the application aim to identify areas that need improvement.
Compile-time unit tests
Testing is an integral part of development. The modern development workflow is to
edit code, then run tests. Moreover, if you’re a Test-Driven Development (TDD) prac-
titioner, you develop a new feature or fix a bug by first writing a failing test and then
writing the code to make it pass. Even if you’re not a TDD adherent, an excellent way
to fix a bug is to write a test that reproduces the bug and then write the code that
fixes it.
The tests that you run as part of this workflow are known as compile-time tests. In a
modern IDE, such as IntelliJ IDEA or Eclipse, you typically don’t compile your code as
a separate step. Rather, you use a single keystroke to compile the code and run the
tests. In order to stay in the flow, these tests need to execute quickly—ideally, no
more than a few seconds.

---

## Page 328

298
CHAPTER 9
Testing microservices: Part 1
The test quadrant defines four different categories of tests:
Q1—Support programming/technology facing: unit and integration tests
Q2—Support programming/business facing: component and end-to-end test
Q3—Critique application/business facing: usability and exploratory testing
Q4—Critique application/technology facing: nonfunctional acceptance tests such
as performance tests
The test quadrant isn’t the only way of organizing tests. There’s also the test pyramid,
which provides guidance on how many tests of each type to write. 
USING THE TEST PYRAMID AS A GUIDE TO FOCUSING YOUR TESTING EFFORTS
We must write different kinds of tests in order to be confident that our application
works. The challenge, though, is that the execution time and complexity of a test
increase with its scope. Also, the larger the scope of a test and the more moving parts
it has, the less reliable it becomes. Unreliable tests are almost as bad as no tests,
because if you can’t trust a test, you’re likely to ignore failures.
 On one end of the spectrum are unit tests for individual classes. They’re fast to
execute, easy to write, and reliable. At the other end of the spectrum are end-to-end
tests for the entire application. These tend to be slow, difficult to write, and often
unreliable because of their complexity. Because we don’t have unlimited budget for
development and testing, we want to focus on writing tests that have small scope with-
out compromising the effectiveness of the test suite.
 The test pyramid, shown in figure 9.5, is a good guide (https://martinfowler.com/
bliki/TestPyramid.html). At the base of the pyramid are the fast, simple, and reliable
unit tests. At the top of the pyramid are the slow, complex, and brittle end-to-end tests.
Like the USDA food pyramid, although more useful and less controversial (https://en
.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_USDA_nutrition_guides), the test pyramid describes
the relative proportions of each type of test.
 The key idea of the test pyramid is that as we move up the pyramid we should write
fewer and fewer tests. We should write lots of unit tests and very few end-to-end tests.
Q2 AUTOMATED
Q3 MANUAL
Business facing
Technology facing
Support programming
Critique project
Q1 AUTOMATED
Q4 MANUAL/
AUTOMATED
Functional/
acceptance tests
Exploratory
testing, usability
testing
Unit,
integration,
component
Non-functional
acceptance tests:
performance
and more
Figure 9.4
The test quadrant categorizes tests along 
two dimensions. The first dimension is whether a test 
is business facing or technology facing. The second is 
whether the purpose of the test is to support 
programming or critique the application.

---

## Page 329

299
Testing strategies for microservice architectures
As you’ll see in this chapter, I describe a strategy that emphasizes testing the pieces of
a service. It even minimizes the number of component tests, which test an entire service.
 It’s clear how to test individual microservices such as Consumer Service, which
don’t depend on any other services. But what about services such as Order Service,
that do depend on numerous other services? And how can we be confident that the
application as a whole works? This is the key challenge of testing applications that
have a microservice architecture. The complexity of testing has moved from the
individual services to the interactions between them. Let’s look at how to tackle this
problem. 
9.1.2
The challenge of testing microservices
Interprocess communication plays a much more important role in a microservices-
based application than in a monolithic application. A monolithic application might
communicate with a few external clients and services. For example, the monolithic
version of the FTGO application uses a few third-party web services, such as Stripe
for payments, Twilio for messaging, and Amazon SES for email, which have stable
APIs. Any interaction between the modules of the application is through program-
ming language-based APIs. Interprocess communication is very much on the edge
of the application.
 In contrast, interprocess communication is central to microservice architecture. A
microservices-based application is a distributed system. Teams are constantly develop-
ing their services and evolving their APIs. It’s essential that developers of a service
write tests that verify that their service interacts with its dependencies and clients.
 As described in chapter 3, services communicate with each other using a variety
of interaction styles and IPC mechanisms. Some services use request/response-style
interaction that’s implemented using a synchronous protocol, such as REST or gRPC.
End-to-end
Slow, brittle, costly
Fast, reliable, cheap
Component
Integration
Unit
Acceptance tests for
an application
Acceptance tests
for a service
Verify that a service
communicates with
its dependencies
Test the business logic
Figure 9.5
The test pyramid describes the relative proportions of each type of test that 
you need to write. As you move up the pyramid, you should write fewer and fewer tests.

---

## Page 330

300
CHAPTER 9
Testing microservices: Part 1
Other services interact through request/asynchronous reply or publish/subscribe
using asynchronous messaging. For instance, figure 9.6 shows how some of the ser-
vices in the FTGO application communicate. Each arrow points from a consumer ser-
vice to a producer service.
The arrow points in the direction of the dependency, from the consumer of the API
to the provider of the API. The assumptions that a consumer makes about an API
depend on the nature of the interaction:
REST client  service—The API gateway routes requests to services and imple-
ments API composition.
Domain event consumer  publisher—Order History Service consumes events pub-
lished by Order Service.
Command message requestor  replier—Order Service sends command messages
to various services and consumes the replies.
REST client
REST service
Key
Subscriber
Domain event
publisher
(Command message)
requestor
Replier
E
E
E
E
E
C
C
C
C
Restaurant
Service
Consumer
Service
Order History
Service
Delivery
Service
API
gateway
Invokes services
using HTTP
Subscribes to
order* events
Order Service saga
sends commands
to various services.
Accounting
Service
Order
Service
Kitchen
Service
Figure 9.6
Some of the interservice communication in the FTGO application. Each arrow points 
from a consumer service to a producer service.

---

## Page 331

301
Testing strategies for microservice architectures
Each interaction between a pair of services represents an agreement or contract
between the two services. Order History Service and Order Service must, for exam-
ple, agree on the event message structure and the channel that they’re published to.
Similarly, the API gateway and the services must agree on the REST API endpoints.
And Order Service and each service that it invokes using asynchronous request/
response must agree on the command channel and the format of the command and
reply messages.
 As a developer of a service, you need to be confident that the services you consume
have stable APIs. Similarly, you don’t want to unintentionally make breaking changes
to your service’s API. For example, if you’re working on Order Service, you want to be
sure that the developers of your service’s dependencies, such as Consumer Service and
Kitchen Service, don’t change their APIs in ways that are incompatible with your ser-
vice. Similarly, you must ensure that you don’t change the Order Services’s API in a
way that breaks the API Gateway or Order History Service.
 One way to verify that two services can interact is to run both services, invoke an API
that triggers the communication, and verify that it has the expected outcome. This will
certainly catch integration problems, but it’s basically an end-to-end. The test likely
would need to run numerous other transitive dependencies of those services. A test
might also need to invoke complex, high-level functionality such as business logic, even
if its goal is to test relatively low-level IPC. It’s best to avoid writing end-to-end tests like
these. Somehow, we need to write faster, simpler, and more reliable tests that ideally test
services in isolation. The solution is to use what’s known as consumer-driven contract testing.
CONSUMER-DRIVEN CONTRACT TESTING
Imagine that you’re a member of the team developing API Gateway, described in chap-
ter 8. The API Gateway’s OrderServiceProxy invokes various REST endpoints, includ-
ing the GET /orders/{orderId} endpoint. It’s essential that we write tests that verify that
API Gateway and Order Service agree on an API. In the terminology of consumer con-
tract testing, the two services participate in a consumer-provider relationship. API Gateway is
a consumer, and Order Service is a provider. A consumer contract test is an integration
test for a provider, such as Order Service, that verifies that its API matches the expecta-
tions of a consumer, such as API Gateway.
 A consumer contract test focuses on verifying that the “shape” of a provider’s API
meets the consumer’s expectations. For a REST endpoint, a contract test verifies that
the provider implements an endpoint that
Has the expected HTTP method and path
Accepts the expected headers, if any
Accepts a request body, if any
Returns a response with the expected status code, headers, and body
It’s important to remember that contract tests don’t thoroughly test the provider’s
business logic. That’s the job of unit tests. Later on, you’ll see that consumer contract
tests for a REST API are in fact mock controller tests.

---

## Page 332

302
CHAPTER 9
Testing microservices: Part 1
 The team that develops the consumer writes a contract test suite and adds it (for
example, via a pull request) to the provider’s test suite. The developers of other ser-
vices that invoke Order Service also contribute a test suite, as shown in figure 9.7.
Each test suite will test those aspects of Order Service’s API that are relevant to each
consumer. The test suite for Order History Service, for example, verifies that Order
Service publishes the expected events.
These test suites are executed by the deployment pipeline for Order Service. If a con-
sumer contract test fails, that failure tells the producer team that they’ve made a break-
ing change to the API. They must either fix the API or talk to the consumer team.
Consumer-driven contract tests typically use testing by example. The interaction
between a consumer and provider is defined by a set of examples, known as contracts.
Each contract consists of example messages that are exchanged during one interaction.
Pattern: Consumer-driven contract test
Verify that a service meets the expectations of its clients See http://microser-
vices.io/patterns/testing/service-integration-contract-test.html.
API gateway team
Writes
Order Service deployment pipeline
Order
Service
API gateway -
Order Service
contract test
suite
Order History Service team
Writes
Tests
Tests
Tests
Order History
Service - Order
Service contract
test suite
... Service team
Writes
... Service -
Order Service
contract test
suite
Figure 9.7
Each team that develops a service that consumes Order Service’s API contributes 
a contract test suite. The test suite verifies that the API matches the consumer’s expectations. 
This test suite, along with those contributed by other teams, is run by Order Service’s 
deployment pipeline.

---

## Page 333

303
Testing strategies for microservice architectures
For instance, a contract for a REST API consists of an example HTTP request and
response. On the surface, it may seem better to define the interaction using schemas
written using, for example, OpenAPI or JSON schema. But it turns out schemas aren’t
that useful when writing tests. A test can validate the response using the schema but it
still needs to invoke the provider with an example request.
 What’s more, consumer tests also need example responses. That’s because even
though the focus of consumer-driven contract testing is to test a provider, contracts
are also used to verify that the consumer conforms to the contract. For instance, a
consumer-side contract test for a REST client uses the contract to configure an HTTP
stub service that verifies that the HTTP request matches the contract’s request and
sends back the contract’s HTTP response. Testing both sides of interaction ensures
that the consumer and provider agree on the API. Later on we’ll look at examples of
how to write this kind of testing, but first let’s see how to write consumer contract tests
using Spring Cloud Contract.
TESTING SERVICES USING SPRING CLOUD CONTRACT
Two popular contract testing frameworks are Spring Cloud Contract (https://cloud
.spring.io/spring-cloud-contract/), which is a consumer contract testing framework
for Spring applications, and the Pact family of frameworks (https://github.com/pact-
foundation), which support a variety of languages. The FTGO application is a Spring
framework-based application, so in this chapter I’m going to describe how to use
Spring Cloud Contract. It provides a Groovy domain-specific language (DSL) for writ-
ing contracts. Each contract is a concrete example of an interaction between a con-
sumer and a provider, such as an HTTP request and response. Spring Cloud Contract
code generates contract tests for the provider. It also configures mocks, such as a
mock HTTP server, for consumer integration tests.
 Say, for example, you’re working on API Gateway and want to write a consumer
contract test for Order Service. Figure 9.8 shows the process, which requires you to col-
laborate with Order Service teams. You write contracts that define how API Gateway
interacts with Order Service. The Order Service team uses these contracts to test Order
Service, and you use them to test API Gateway. The sequence of steps is as follows:
1
You write one or more contracts, such as the one shown in listing 9.1. Each con-
tract consists of an HTTP request that API Gateway might send to Order Service
and an expected HTTP response. You give the contracts, perhaps via a Git pull
request, to the Order Service team.
2
The Order Service team tests Order Service using consumer contract tests,
which Spring Cloud Contract code generates from contracts.
Pattern: Consumer-side contract test
Verify that the client of a service can communicate with the service. See https://
microservices.io/patterns/testing/consumer-side-contract-test.html.

---

## Page 334

304
CHAPTER 9
Testing microservices: Part 1
3
The Order Service team publishes the contracts that tested Order Service to a
Maven repository.
4
You use the published contracts to write tests for API Gateway.
Because you test API Gateway using the published contracts, you can be confident that
it works with the deployed Order Service.
 The contracts are the key part of this testing strategy. The following listing shows an
example Spring Cloud Contract. It consists of an HTTP request and an HTTP response.
org.springframework.cloud.contract.spec.Contract.make {
request {
                   
method 'GET'
url '/orders/1223232'
}
response {
       
status 200
headers {
header('Content-Type': 'application/json;charset=UTF-8')
}
body("{ ... }")
}
}
Listing 9.1
A contract that describes how API Gateway invokes Order Service
Writes
Code generated
from
Contract.make {
request {..}
response {...}
}
}
Order Service
consumer
contract tests
API gateway
API gateway team
Reads
Tests
Develops
Tests
Develops
Publishes
Published
contract
Maven repository
Order
Service
Order Service team
API gateway
integration test
Figure 9.8
The API Gateway team writes the contracts. The Order Service team 
uses those contracts to test Order Service and publishes them to a repository. The 
API Gateway team uses the published contracts to test API Gateway.
The HTTP request’s 
method and path
The HTTP response’s status 
code, headers, and body

---

## Page 335

305
Testing strategies for microservice architectures
The request element is an HTTP request for the REST endpoint GET /orders/
{orderId}. The response element is an HTTP response that describes an Order
expected by API Gateway. The Groovy contracts are part of the provider’s code base.
Each consumer team writes contracts that describe how their service interacts with
the provider and gives them, perhaps via a Git pull request, to the provider team.
The provider team is responsible for packaging the contracts as a JAR and publish-
ing them to a Maven repository. The consumer-side tests download the JAR from the
repository.
 Each contract’s request and response play dual roles of test data and the specifi-
cation of expected behavior. In a consumer-side test, the contract is used to config-
ure a stub, which is similar to a Mockito mock object and simulates the behavior of
Order Service. It enables API Gateway to be tested without running Order Service.
In the provider-side test, the generated test class invokes the provider with the con-
tract’s request and verifies that it returns a response that matches the contract’s
response. The next chapter discusses the details of how to use Spring Cloud Con-
tract, but now we’re going to look at how to use consumer contract testing for mes-
saging APIs. 
CONSUMER CONTRACT TESTS FOR MESSAGING APIS
A REST client isn’t the only kind of consumer that has expectations of a provider’s API.
Services that subscribe to domain events and use asynchronous request/response-based
communication are also consumers. They consume some other service’s messaging
API, and make assumptions about the nature of that API. We must also write con-
sumer contract tests for these services.
 Spring Cloud Contract also provides support for testing messaging-based interac-
tions. The structure of a contract and how it’s used by the tests depend on the type of
interaction. A contract for domain event publishing consists of an example domain
event. A provider test causes the provider to emit an event and verifies that it matches
the contract’s event. A consumer test verifies that the consumer can handle that event.
In the next chapter, I describe an example test.
 A contract for an asynchronous request/response interaction is similar to an
HTTP contract. It consists of a request message and a response message. A provider
test invokes the API with the contract’s request message and verifies that the response
matches the contract’s response. A consumer test uses the contract to configure a stub
subscriber, which listens for the contract’s request message and replies with the speci-
fied response. The next chapter discusses an example test. But first we’ll take a look at
the deployment pipeline, which runs these and other tests. 
9.1.3
The deployment pipeline
Every service has a deployment pipeline. Jez Humble’s book, Continuous Delivery
(Addison-Wesley, 2010) describes a deployment pipeline as the automated process of get-
ting code from the developer’s desktop into production. As figure 9.9 shows, it consists

---

## Page 336

306
CHAPTER 9
Testing microservices: Part 1
of a series of stages that execute test suites, followed by a stage that releases or deploys
the service. Ideally, it’s fully automated, but it might contain manual steps. A deploy-
ment pipeline is often implemented using a Continuous Integration (CI) server, such
as Jenkins.
As code flows through the pipeline, the test suites subject it to increasingly more thor-
ough testing in environments that are more production like. At the same time, the
execution time of each test suite typically grows. The idea is to provide feedback about
test failures as rapidly as possible.
 The example deployment pipeline shown in figure 9.9 consists of the following
stages:
Pre-commit tests stage—Runs the unit tests. This is executed by the developer
before committing their changes.
Commit tests stage—Compiles the service, runs the unit tests, and performs static
code analysis.
Integration tests stage—Runs the integration tests.
Component tests stage—Runs the component tests for the service.
Deploy stage—Deploys the service into production.
The CI server runs the commit stage when a developer commits a change. It executes
extremely quickly, so it provides rapid feedback about the commit. The later stages
take longer to run, providing less immediate feedback. If all the tests pass, the final
stage is when this pipeline deploys it into production.
 In this example, the deployment pipeline is fully automated all the way from com-
mit to deployment. There are, however, situations that require manual steps. For
example, you might need a manual testing stage, such as a staging environment. In
such a scenario, the code progresses to the next stage when a tester clicks a button to
indicate that it was successful. Alternatively, a deployment pipeline for an on-premise
Pre-commit
tests
Slow feedback
Fast feedback
Production
ready
Not production
ready
Commit
tests
stage
Deployment pipeline
Integration
tests
stage
Component
tests
stage
Production
environment
Deploy
stage
Figure 9.9
An example deployment pipeline for Order Service. It consists of a series of stages. 
The pre-commit tests are run by the developer prior to committing their code. The remaining stages 
are executed by an automated tool, such as the Jenkins CI server.

---

## Page 337

307
Writing unit tests for a service
product would release the new version of the service. Later on, the released services
would be packaged into a product release and shipped to customers.
 Now that we’ve looked at the organization of the deployment pipeline and when it
executes the different types of tests, let’s head to the bottom of the test pyramid and
look at how to write unit tests for a service. 
9.2
Writing unit tests for a service
Imagine that you want to write a test that verifies that the FTGO application’s Order
Service correctly calculates the subtotal of an Order. You could write tests that run
Order Service, invoke its REST API to create an Order, and check that the HTTP
response contains the expected values. The drawback of this approach is that not only
is the test complex, it’s also slow. If these tests were the compile-time tests for the
Order class, you’d waste a lot of time waiting for it to finish. A much more productive
approach is to write unit tests for the Order class.
 As figure 9.10 shows, unit tests are the lowest level of the test pyramid. They’re
technology-facing tests that support development. A unit test verifies that a unit, which
is a very small part of a service, works correctly. A unit is typically a class, so the goal of
unit testing is to verify that it behaves as expected.
End-to-end
Component
Integration
Unit
Stub/mock
dependency 1
Stub/mock
dependency 2
Stub/mock
dependency
...
Dependency 1
Dependency 2
Dependency
...
Solitary
unit test
Tests
Class
Social
unit test
Tests
Class
Figure 9.10
Unit tests are the base of the pyramid. They’re fast running, easy to write, and reliable. 
A solitary unit test tests a class in isolation, using mocks or stubs for its dependencies. A sociable 
unit test tests a class and its dependencies.

---

## Page 338

308
CHAPTER 9
Testing microservices: Part 1
There are two types of unit tests (https://martinfowler.com/bliki/UnitTest.html):
Solitary unit test—Tests a class in isolation using mock objects for the class’s
dependencies
Sociable unit test—Tests a class and its dependencies
The responsibilities of the class and its role in the architecture determine which type
of test to use. Figure 9.11 shows the hexagonal architecture of a typical service and the
type of unit test that you’ll typically use for each kind of class. Controller and service
classes are often tested using solitary unit tests. Domain objects, such as entities and
value objects, are typically tested using sociable unit tests.
«Message Channel»
«Message Channel»
POST/something
GET/something/id
Domain logic
Service
Entity
Solitary
unit test
Sociable
unit test
Value
object
Saga
Inbound
message
adapter
Outbound
message
adapter
Database
adapter
Database
Repository
Controller
Solitary
unit test
Figure 9.11
The responsibilities of a class determine whether to use a solitary or sociable unit test.

---

## Page 339

309
Writing unit tests for a service
The typical testing strategy for each class is as follows:
Entities, such as Order, which as described in chapter 5 are objects with per-
sistent identity, are tested using sociable unit tests.
Value objects, such as Money, which as described in chapter 5 are objects that are
collections of values, are tested using sociable unit tests.
Sagas, such as CreateOrderSaga, which as described in chapter 4 maintain data
consistency across services, are tested using sociable unit tests.
Domain services, such as OrderService, which as described in chapter 5 are
classes that implement business logic that doesn’t belong in entities or value
objects, are tested using solitary unit tests.
Controllers, such as OrderController, which handle HTTP requests, are tested
using solitary unit tests.
Inbound and outbound messaging gateways are tested using solitary unit tests.
Let’s begin by looking at how to test entities.
9.2.1
Developing unit tests for entities
The following listing shows an excerpt of OrderTest class, which implements the unit
tests for the Order entity. The class has an @Before setUp() method that creates an Order
before running each test. Its @Test methods might further initialize Order, invoke one of
its methods, and then make assertions about the return value and the state of Order.
public class OrderTest {
private ResultWithEvents<Order> createResult;
private Order order;
@Before
public void setUp() throws Exception {
createResult = Order.createOrder(CONSUMER_ID, AJANTA_ID, CHICKEN_VINDALOO
_LINE_ITEMS);
order = createResult.result;
}
@Test
public void shouldCalculateTotal() {
assertEquals(CHICKEN_VINDALOO_PRICE.multiply(CHICKEN_VINDALOO_QUANTITY),
order.getOrderTotal());
}
...
}
The @Test shouldCalculateTotal() method verifies that Order.getOrderTotal()
returns the expected value. Unit tests thoroughly test the business logic. They are
Listing 9.2
A simple, fast-running unit test for the Order entity

---

## Page 340

310
CHAPTER 9
Testing microservices: Part 1
sociable unit tests for the Order class and its dependencies. You can use them as
compile-time tests because they execute extremely quickly. The Order class relies on
the Money value object, so it’s important to test that class as well. Let’s see how to do that. 
9.2.2
Writing unit tests for value objects
Value objects are immutable, so they tend to be easy to test. You don’t have to worry
about side effects. A test for a value object typically creates a value object in a particu-
lar state, invokes one of its methods, and makes assertions about the return value. List-
ing 9.3 shows the tests for the Money value object, which is a simple class that
represents a money value. These tests verify the behavior of the Money class’s methods,
including add(), which adds two Money objects, and multiply(), which multiplies a
Money object by an integer. They are solitary tests because the Money class doesn’t
depend on any other application classes.
public class MoneyTest {
private final int M1_AMOUNT = 10;
private final int M2_AMOUNT = 15;
private Money m1 = new Money(M1_AMOUNT);
private Money m2 = new Money(M2_AMOUNT);
@Test
public void shouldAdd() {
         
assertEquals(new Money(M1_AMOUNT + M2_AMOUNT), m1.add(m2));
}
@Test
public void shouldMultiply() {     
int multiplier = 12;
assertEquals(new Money(M2_AMOUNT * multiplier), m2.multiply(multiplier));
}
...
}
Entities and value objects are the building blocks of a service’s business logic. But
some business logic also resides in the service’s sagas and services. Let’s look at how to
test those. 
9.2.3
Developing unit tests for sagas
A saga, such as the CreateOrderSaga class, implements important business logic, so
needs to be tested. It’s a persistent object that sends command messages to saga partic-
ipants and processes their replies. As described in chapter 4, CreateOrderSaga
exchanges command/reply messages with several services, such as Consumer Service
and Kitchen Service. A test for this class creates a saga and verifies that it sends the
Listing 9.3
A simple, fast-running test for the Money value object
Verify that two 
Money objects can 
be added together.
Verify that a Money 
object can be multiplied 
by an integer.

---

## Page 341

311
Writing unit tests for a service
expected sequence of messages to the saga participants. One test you need to write is
for the happy path. You must also write tests for the various scenarios where the saga
rolls back because a saga participant sent back a failure message.
 One approach would be to write tests that use a real database and message broker
along with stubs to simulate the various saga participants. For example, a stub for
Consumer Service would subscribe to the consumerService command channel and
send back the desired reply message. But tests written using this approach would be
quite slow. A much more effective approach is to write tests that mock those classes
that interact with the database and message broker. That way, we can focus on testing
the saga’s core responsibility.
 Listing 9.4 shows a test for CreateOrderSaga. It’s a sociable unit test that tests the
saga class and its dependencies. It’s written using the Eventuate Tram Saga testing
framework (https://github.com/eventuate-tram/eventuate-tram-sagas). This frame-
work provides an easy-to-use DSL that abstracts away the details of interacting with
sagas. With this DSL, you can create a saga and verify that it sends the correct com-
mand messages. Under the covers, the Saga testing framework configures the Saga
framework with mocks for the database and messaging infrastructure.
public class CreateOrderSagaTest {
@Test
public void shouldCreateOrder() {
given()
.saga(new CreateOrderSaga(kitchenServiceProxy),     
new CreateOrderSagaState(ORDER_ID,
CHICKEN_VINDALOO_ORDER_DETAILS)).
expect().
              
command(new ValidateOrderByConsumer(CONSUMER_ID, ORDER_ID,
CHICKEN_VINDALOO_ORDER_TOTAL)).
to(ConsumerServiceChannels.consumerServiceChannel).
andGiven().
successReply().
               
expect().
command(new CreateTicket(AJANTA_ID, ORDER_ID, null)).   
to(KitchenServiceChannels.kitchenServiceChannel);
}
@Test
public void shouldRejectOrderDueToConsumerVerificationFailed() {
given()
.saga(new CreateOrderSaga(kitchenServiceProxy),
new CreateOrderSagaState(ORDER_ID,
CHICKEN_VINDALOO_ORDER_DETAILS)).
expect().
command(new ValidateOrderByConsumer(CONSUMER_ID, ORDER_ID,
CHICKEN_VINDALOO_ORDER_TOTAL)).
to(ConsumerServiceChannels.consumerServiceChannel).
andGiven().
Listing 9.4
A simple, fast-running unit test for CreateOrderSaga
Create
the saga.
Verify that it sends 
a ValidateOrderBy-
Consumer message 
to Consumer Service.
Send a Success reply 
to that message.
Verify that it sends 
a CreateTicket 
message to 
Kitchen Service.

---

## Page 342

312
CHAPTER 9
Testing microservices: Part 1
failureReply().
            
expect().
command(new RejectOrderCommand(ORDER_ID)).
to(OrderServiceChannels.orderServiceChannel);
      
}
}
The @Test shouldCreateOrder() method tests the happy path. The @Test should-
RejectOrderDueToConsumerVerificationFailed() method tests the scenario where
Consumer Service rejects the order. It verifies that CreateOrderSaga sends a Reject-
OrderCommand to compensate for the consumer being rejected. The CreateOrder-
SagaTest class has methods that test other failure scenarios.
 Let’s now look at how to test domain services. 
9.2.4
Writing unit tests for domain services
The majority of a service’s business logic is implemented by the entities, value objects,
and sagas. Domain service classes, such as the OrderService class, implement the
remainder. This class is a typical domain service class. Its methods invoke entities and
repositories and publish domain events. An effective way to test this kind of class is to
use a mostly solitary unit test, which mocks dependencies such as repositories and
messaging classes.
 Listing 9.5 shows the OrderServiceTest class, which tests OrderService. It defines
solitary unit tests, which use Mockito mocks for the service’s dependencies. Each test
implements the test phases as follows:
1
Setup—Configures the mock objects for the service’s dependencies
2
Execute—Invokes a service method
3
Verify—Verifies that the value returned by the service method is correct and that
the dependencies have been invoked correctly
public class OrderServiceTest {
private OrderService orderService;
private OrderRepository orderRepository;
private DomainEventPublisher eventPublisher;
private RestaurantRepository restaurantRepository;
private SagaManager<CreateOrderSagaState> createOrderSagaManager;
private SagaManager<CancelOrderSagaData> cancelOrderSagaManager;
private SagaManager<ReviseOrderSagaData> reviseOrderSagaManager;
@Before
public void setup() {
orderRepository = mock(OrderRepository.class);         
eventPublisher = mock(DomainEventPublisher.class);
restaurantRepository = mock(RestaurantRepository.class);
Listing 9.5
A simple, fast-running unit test for the OrderService class
Send a failure 
reply indicating 
that Consumer 
Service rejected 
Order.
Verify that the saga sends
a RejectOrderCommand
message to Order Service.
Create Mockito 
mocks for 
OrderService’s 
dependencies.

---

## Page 343

313
Writing unit tests for a service
createOrderSagaManager = mock(SagaManager.class);
cancelOrderSagaManager = mock(SagaManager.class);
reviseOrderSagaManager = mock(SagaManager.class);
orderService = new OrderService(orderRepository, eventPublisher,  
restaurantRepository, createOrderSagaManager,
cancelOrderSagaManager, reviseOrderSagaManager);
}
@Test
public void shouldCreateOrder() {
when(restaurantRepository
       
.findById(AJANTA_ID)).thenReturn(Optional.of(AJANTA_RESTAURANT_);
when(orderRepository.save(any(Order.class))).then(invocation -> {  
Order order = (Order) invocation.getArguments()[0];
order.setId(ORDER_ID);
return order;
});
Order order = orderService.createOrder(CONSUMER_ID,
   
AJANTA_ID, CHICKEN_VINDALOO_MENU_ITEMS_AND_QUANTITIES);
verify(orderRepository).save(same(order));        
verify(eventPublisher).publish(Order.class, ORDER_ID,     
singletonList(
new OrderCreatedEvent(CHICKEN_VINDALOO_ORDER_DETAILS)));
verify(createOrderSagaManager)
                  
.create(new CreateOrderSagaState(ORDER_ID,
CHICKEN_VINDALOO_ORDER_DETAILS),
Order.class, ORDER_ID);
}
}
The setUp() method creates an OrderService injected with mock dependencies.
The @Test shouldCreateOrder() method verifies that OrderService.createOrder()
invokes OrderRepository to save the newly created Order, publishes an OrderCreated-
Event, and creates a CreateOrderSaga.
 Now that we’ve seen how to unit test the domain logic classes, let’s look at how to
unit test the adapters that interact with external systems. 
9.2.5
Developing unit tests for controllers
Services, such as Order Service, typically have one or more controllers that handle
HTTP requests from other services and the API gateway. A controller class consists of
a set of request handler methods. Each method implements a REST API endpoint. A
method’s parameters represent values from the HTTP request, such as path variables.
It typically invokes a domain service or a repository and returns a response object.
Create an OrderService injected
with mock dependencies.
Configure RestaurantRepository.findById() 
to return the Ajanta restaurant.
Configure OrderRepository.save()
to set Order’s ID.
 Invoke
OrderService
.create().
Verify that 
OrderService saved 
the newly created 
Order in the database.
Verify that
OrderService
published
an Order-
CreatedEvent.
Verify that Order-
Service created a 
CreateOrderSaga.

---

## Page 344

314
CHAPTER 9
Testing microservices: Part 1
OrderController, for instance, invokes OrderService and OrderRepository. An
effective testing strategy for controllers is solitary unit tests that mock the services
and repositories.
 You could write a test class similar to the OrderServiceTest class to instantiate a
controller class and invoke its methods. But this approach doesn’t test some import-
ant functionality, such as request routing. It’s much more effective to use a mock MVC
testing framework, such as Spring Mock Mvc, which is part of the Spring Framework,
or Rest Assured Mock MVC, which builds on Spring Mock Mvc. Tests written using
one of these frameworks make what appear to be HTTP requests and make assertions
about HTTP responses. These frameworks enable you to test HTTP request routing
and conversion of Java objects to and from JSON without having to make real network
calls. Under the covers, Spring Mock Mvc instantiates just enough of the Spring MVC
classes to make this possible.
Listing 9.6 shows the OrderControllerTest class, which tests Order Service’s Order-
Controller. It defines solitary unit tests that use mocks for OrderController’s depen-
dencies. It’s written using Rest Assured Mock MVC , which provides a simple DSL that
abstracts away the details of interacting with controllers. Rest Assured makes it easy to
send a mock HTTP request to a controller and verify the response. OrderController-
Test creates a controller that’s injected with Mockito mocks for OrderService and
OrderRepository. Each test configures the mocks, makes an HTTP request, verifies that
the response is correct, and possibly verifies that the controller invoked the mocks.
public class OrderControllerTest {
private OrderService orderService;
private OrderRepository orderRepository;
@Before
public void setUp() throws Exception {
orderService = mock(OrderService.class);
      
orderRepository = mock(OrderRepository.class);
Are these really unit tests?
Because these tests use the Spring Framework, you might argue that they’re not unit
tests. They’re certainly more heavyweight than the unit tests I’ve described so far.
The Spring Mock Mvc documentation refers to these as out-of-servlet-container inte-
gration tests (https://docs.spring.io/spring/docs/current/spring-framework-reference/
testing.html#spring-mvc-test-vs-end-to-end-integration-tests). Yet Rest Assured Mock
MVC describes these tests as unit tests (https://github.com/rest-assured/rest-
assured/wiki/Usage#spring-mock-mvc-module). Regardless of the debate over termi-
nology, these are important tests to write.
Listing 9.6
A simple, fast-running unit test for the OrderController class
Create mocks for 
OrderController’s 
dependencies.

---

## Page 345

315
Writing unit tests for a service
orderController = new OrderController(orderService, orderRepository);
}
@Test
public void shouldFindOrder() {
when(orderRepository.findById(1L))
.thenReturn(Optional.of(CHICKEN_VINDALOO_ORDER_);    
given().
standaloneSetup(configureControllers(
      
new OrderController(orderService, orderRepository))).
when().
get("/orders/1").
    
then().
statusCode(200).
   
body("orderId",
            
equalTo(new Long(OrderDetailsMother.ORDER_ID).intValue())).
body("state",
equalTo(OrderDetailsMother.CHICKEN_VINDALOO_ORDER_STATE.name())).
body("orderTotal",
equalTo(CHICKEN_VINDALOO_ORDER_TOTAL.asString()))
;
}
@Test
public void shouldFindNotOrder() { ... }
private StandaloneMockMvcBuilder controllers(Object... controllers) { ... }
}
The shouldFindOrder() test method first configures the OrderRepository mock to
return an Order. It then makes an HTTP request to retrieve the order. Finally, it
checks that the request was successful and that the response body contains the
expected data.
 Controllers aren’t the only adapters that handle requests from external systems.
There are also event/message handlers, so let’s talk about how to unit test those. 
9.2.6
Writing unit tests for event and message handlers
Services often process messages sent by external systems. Order Service, for example,
has OrderEventConsumer, which is a message adapter that handles domain events pub-
lished by other services. Like controllers, message adapters tend to be simple classes
that invoke domain services. Each of a message adapter’s methods typically invokes a
service method with data from the message or event.
 We can unit test message adapters using an approach similar to the one we used
for unit testing controllers. Each test instances the message adapter, sends a message
to a channel, and verifies that the service mock was invoked correctly. Behind the
Configure the mock 
OrderRepository to 
return an Order.
Configure 
OrderController.
Make an
HTTP
request.
Verify the response 
status code.
Verify
elements
of the JSON
response
body.

---

## Page 346

316
CHAPTER 9
Testing microservices: Part 1
scenes, though, the messaging infrastructure is stubbed, so no message broker is
involved. Let’s look at how to test the OrderEventConsumer class.
 Listing 9.7 shows part of the OrderEventConsumerTest class, which tests Order-
EventConsumer. It verifies that OrderEventConsumer routes each event to the appro-
priate handler method and correctly invokes OrderService. The test uses the
Eventuate Tram Mock Messaging framework, which provides an easy-to-use DSL for
writing mock messaging tests that uses the same given-when-then format as Rest
Assured. Each test instantiates OrderEventConsumer injected with a mock Order-
Service, publishes a domain event, and verifies that OrderEventConsumer correctly
invokes the service mock.
public class OrderEventConsumerTest {
private OrderService orderService;
private OrderEventConsumer orderEventConsumer;
@Before
public void setUp() throws Exception {
orderService = mock(OrderService.class);
orderEventConsumer = new OrderEventConsumer(orderService);
  
}
@Test
public void shouldCreateMenu() {
given().
eventHandlers(orderEventConsumer.domainEventHandlers()).  
when().
aggregate("net.chrisrichardson.ftgo.restaurantservice.domain.Restaurant",
AJANTA_ID).
publishes(new RestaurantCreated(AJANTA_RESTAURANT_NAME,   
RestaurantMother.AJANTA_RESTAURANT_MENU))
then().
verify(() -> {
    
verify(orderService)
.createMenu(AJANTA_ID,
new RestaurantMenu(RestaurantMother.AJANTA_RESTAURANT_MENU_ITEMS));
})
;
}
}
The setUp() method creates an OrderEventConsumer injected with a mock Order-
Service. The shouldCreateMenu() method publishes a RestaurantCreated event
and verifies that OrderEventConsumer invoked OrderService.createMenu(). The
OrderEventConsumerTest class and the other unit test classes execute extremely quickly.
The unit tests run in just a few seconds.
Listing 9.7
A fast-running unit test for the OrderEventConsumer class
Instantiate
OrderEventConsumer with
mocked dependencies.
Configure
OrderEventConsumer
domain handlers.
Publish a
Restaurant-
Created
event.
Verify that OrderEventConsumer 
invoked OrderService.createMenu().

---

## Page 347

317
Summary
 But the unit tests don’t verify that a service, such as Order Service, properly inter-
acts with other services. For example, the unit tests don’t verify that an Order can be
persisted in MySQL. Nor do they verify that CreateOrderSaga sends command mes-
sages in the right format to the right message channel. And they don’t verify that the
RestaurantCreated event processed by OrderEventConsumer has the same structure
as the event published by Restaurant Service. In order to verify that a service prop-
erly interacts with other services, we must write integration tests. We also need to write
component tests that test an entire service in isolation. The next chapter discusses
how to conduct those types of tests, as well as end-to-end tests. 
Summary
Automated testing is the key foundation of rapid, safe delivery of software.
What’s more, because of its inherent complexity, to fully benefit from the
microservice architecture you must automate your tests.
The purpose of a test is to verify the behavior of the system under test (SUT). In
this definition, system is a fancy term that means the software element being
tested. It might be something as small as a class, as large as the entire applica-
tion, or something in between, such as a cluster of classes or an individual ser-
vice. A collection of related tests form a test suite.
A good way to simplify and speed up a test is to use test doubles. A test double is
an object that simulates the behavior of a SUT’s dependency. There are two
types of test doubles: stubs and mocks. A stub is a test double that returns values
to the SUT. A mock is a test double that a test uses to verify that the SUT cor-
rectly invokes a dependency.
Use the test pyramid to determine where to focus your testing efforts for your
services. The majority of your tests should be fast, reliable, and easy-to-write unit
tests. You must minimize the number of end-to-end tests, because they’re slow,
brittle, and time consuming to write.

---

## Page 348

318
Testing microservices:
Part 2
This chapter builds on the previous chapter, which introduced testing concepts,
including the test pyramid. The test pyramid describes the relative proportions of
the different types of tests that you should write. The previous chapter described
how to write unit tests, which are at the base of the testing pyramid. In this chapter,
we continue our ascent of the testing pyramid.
 This chapter begins with how to write integration tests, which are the level
above unit tests in the testing pyramid. Integration tests verify that a service can prop-
erly interact with infrastructure services, such as databases, and other application
services. Next, I cover component tests, which are acceptance tests for services. A com-
ponent test tests a service in isolation by using stubs for its dependencies. After
that, I describe how to write end-to-end tests, which test a group of services or the
This chapter covers
Techniques for testing services in isolation
Using consumer-driven contract testing to write 
tests that quickly yet reliably verify interservice 
communication
When and how to do end-to-end testing of 
applications

---

## Page 349

319
Writing integration tests
entire application. End-to-end tests are at the top of the test pyramid and should,
therefore, be used sparingly.
 Let’s start by taking a look at how to write integration tests.
10.1
Writing integration tests
Services typically interact with other services. For example, Order Service, as fig-
ure 10.1 shows, interacts with several services. Its REST API is consumed by API Gateway,
and its domain events are consumed by services, including Order History Service.
Order Service uses several other services. It persists Orders in MySQL. It also sends
commands to and consumes replies from several other services, such as Kitchen
Service.
In order to be confident that a service such as Order Service works as expected, we
must write tests that verify that the service can properly interact with infrastructure
services and other application services. One approach is to launch all the services and
test them through their APIs. This, however, is what’s known as end-to-end testing,
which is slow, brittle, and costly. As explained in section 10.3, there’s a role for end-to-end
Order History
Service
API
gateway
Order
history
event
handlers
Kitchen
Service
Order
Service
Kitchen
Service
command
handler
Class under test
Legend
Test
Test
Test
Test
Database
Order
aggregate
event
publisher
Event
channel
Command
channel
Reply
channel
Provider
Provider
Consumer
Consumer
Provider
Provider
Order
controller
Order
Repository
Kitchen
Service
proxy
Order
Service
proxy
Figure 10.1
Integration tests must verify that a service can communicate with its clients and 
dependencies. But rather than testing whole services, the strategy is to test the individual adapter 
classes that implement the communication.

---

## Page 350

320
CHAPTER 10
Testing microservices: Part 2
testing sometimes, but it’s at the top of the test pyramid, so you want to minimize the
number of end-to-end tests.
 A much more effective strategy is to write what are known as integration tests. As fig-
ure 10.2 shows, integration tests are the layer above unit tests in the testing pyramid.
They verify that a service can properly interact with infrastructure services and other ser-
vices. But unlike end-to-end tests, they don’t launch services. Instead, we use a couple of
strategies that significantly simplify the tests without impacting their effectiveness.
The first strategy is to test each of the service’s adapters, along with, perhaps, the
adapter’s supporting classes. For example, in section 10.1.1 you’ll see a JPA per-
sistence test that verifies that Orders are persisted correctly. Rather than test persistence
through Order Service’s API, it directly tests the OrderRepository class. Similarly, in
section 10.1.3 you’ll see a test that verifies that Order Service publishes correctly
structured domain events by testing the OrderDomainEventPublisher class. The bene-
fit of testing only a small number of classes rather than the entire service is that the
tests are significantly simpler and faster.
 The second strategy for simplifying integration tests that verify interactions
between application services is to use contracts, discussed in chapter 9. A contract is a
concrete example of an interaction between a pair of services. As table 10.1 shows, the
structure of a contract depends on the type of interaction between the services.
Table 10.1
The structure of a contract depends on the type of interaction between the services.
Interaction style
Consumer
Provider
Contract
REST-based, 
request/response
API Gateway
Order Service
HTTP request and 
response
Publish/subscribe
Order History Service
Order Service
Domain event
Asynchronous 
request/response
Order Service
Kitchen Service
Command message 
and reply message
End-to-end
Component
Integration
Unit
Figure 10.2
Integration tests are the layer 
above unit tests. They verify that a service 
can communicate with its dependencies, 
which includes infrastructure services, such 
as the database, and application services.

---
