# 2. Microservices Patterns With examples in Java 1st edition

> Extracted from: `2. Microservices Patterns With examples in Java 1st edition.pdf` (pages 101-145)
> Total pages in PDF: 522

---

## Page 101

71
Overview of interprocess communication in a microservice architecture
 Another option is to use HTTP’s content negotiation mechanism and include the
version number in the MIME type. For example, a client would request version 1.x of
an Order using a request like this:
GET /orders/xyz HTTP/1.1
Accept: application/vnd.example.resource+json; version=1
...
This request tells the Order Service that the client expects a version 1.x response.
 In order to support multiple versions of an API, the service’s adapters that imple-
ment the APIs will contain logic that translates between the old and new versions.
Also, as described in chapter 8, the API gateway will almost certainly use versioned
APIs. It may even have to support numerous older versions of an API.
 Now we’ll look at the issue of message formats, the choice of which can impact how
easy evolving an API will be. 
3.1.4
Message formats
The essence of IPC is the exchange of messages. Messages usually contain data, and so
an important design decision is the format of that data. The choice of message format
can impact the efficiency of IPC, the usability of the API, and its evolvability. If you’re
using a messaging system or protocols such as HTTP, you get to pick your message for-
mat. Some IPC mechanisms—such as gRPC, which you’ll learn about shortly—might
dictate the message format. In either case, it’s essential to use a cross-language mes-
sage format. Even if you’re writing your microservices in a single language today, it’s
likely that you’ll use other languages in the future. You shouldn’t, for example, use
Java serialization.
 There are two main categories of message formats: text and binary. Let’s look at
each one.
TEXT-BASED MESSAGE FORMATS
The first category is text-based formats such as JSON and XML. An advantage of these
formats is that not only are they human readable, they’re self describing. A JSON mes-
sage is a collection of named properties. Similarly, an XML message is effectively a col-
lection of named elements and values. This format enables a consumer of a message
to pick out the values of interest and ignore the rest. Consequently, many changes to
the message schema can easily be backward-compatible.
 The structure of XML documents is specified by an XML schema (www.w3.org/
XML/Schema). Over time, the developer community has come to realize that JSON also
needs a similar mechanism. One popular option is to use the JSON Schema standard
(http://json-schema.org). A JSON schema defines the names and types of a message’s
properties and whether they’re optional or required. As well as being useful documenta-
tion, a JSON schema can be used by an application to validate incoming messages.
 A downside of using a text-based messages format is that the messages tend to be
verbose, especially XML. Every message has the overhead of containing the names of

---

## Page 102

72
CHAPTER 3
Interprocess communication in a microservice architecture
the attributes in addition to their values. Another drawback is the overhead of parsing
text, especially when messages are large. Consequently, if efficiency and performance
are important, you may want to consider using a binary format. 
BINARY MESSAGE FORMATS
There are several different binary formats to choose from. Popular formats include
Protocol Buffers (https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/overview)
and Avro (https://avro.apache.org). Both formats provide a typed IDL for defining
the structure of your messages. A compiler then generates the code that serializes and
deserializes the messages. You’re forced to take an API-first approach to service
design! Moreover, if you write your client in a statically typed language, the compiler
checks that it uses the API correctly.
 One difference between these two binary formats is that Protocol Buffers uses
tagged fields, whereas an Avro consumer needs to know the schema in order to inter-
pret messages. As a result, handling API evolution is easier with Protocol Buffers
than with Avro. This blog post (http://martin.kleppmann.com/2012/12/05/schema-
evolution-in-avro-protocol-buffers-thrift.html) is an excellent comparison of Thrift,
Protocol Buffers, and Avro.
 Now that we’ve looked at message formats, let’s look at specific IPC mechanisms
that transport the messages, starting with the Remote procedure invocation (RPI)
pattern. 
3.2
Communicating using the synchronous Remote 
procedure invocation pattern
When using a remote procedure invocation-based IPC mechanism, a client sends a
request to a service, and the service processes the request and sends back a response.
Some clients may block waiting for a response, and others might have a reactive, non-
blocking architecture. But unlike when using messaging, the client assumes that the
response will arrive in a timely fashion.
 Figure 3.1 shows how RPI works. The business logic in the client invokes a proxy
interface , implemented by an RPI proxy adapter class. The RPI proxy makes a request to
the service. The request is handled by an RPI server adapter class, which invokes the
service’s business logic via an interface. It then sends back a reply to the RPI proxy,
which returns the result to the client’s business logic.
The proxy interface usually encapsulates the underlying communication protocol.
There are numerous protocols to choose from. In this section, I describe REST and
Pattern: Remote procedure invocation
A client invokes a service using a synchronous, remote procedure invocation-based
protocol, such as REST (http://microservices.io/patterns/communication-style/
messaging.html).

---

## Page 103

73
Communicating using the synchronous Remote procedure invocation pattern
gRPC. I cover how to improve the availability of your services by properly handling
partial failure and explain why a microservices-based application that uses RPI must
use a service discovery mechanism.
 Let’s first take a look at REST.
3.2.1
Using REST
Today, it’s fashionable to develop APIs in the RESTful style (https://en.wikipedia
.org/wiki/Representational_state_transfer). REST is an IPC mechanism that (almost
always) uses HTTP. Roy Fielding, the creator of REST, defines REST as follows:
REST provides a set of architectural constraints that, when applied as a whole, emphasizes
scalability of component interactions, generality of interfaces, independent deployment of
components, and intermediary components to reduce interaction latency, enforce security,
and encapsulate legacy systems.
www.ics.uci.edu/~fielding/pubs/dissertation/top.htm
A key concept in REST is a resource, which typically represents a single business
object, such as a Customer or Product, or a collection of business objects. REST
uses the HTTP verbs for manipulating resources, which are referenced using a
URL. For example, a GET request returns the representation of a resource, which is
often in the form of an XML document or JSON object, although other formats
such as binary can be used. A POST request creates a new resource, and a PUT
request updates a resource. The Order Service, for example, has a POST /orders
endpoint for creating an Order and a GET /orders/{orderId} endpoint for retriev-
ing an Order.
Business logic
invokes
Business logic
Proxy interface
Service interface
Client
Service
RPI
proxy
Request
Reply
RPI
server
Figure 3.1
The client’s business logic invokes an interface that is implemented by an RPI proxy 
adapter class. The RPI proxy class makes a request to the service. The RPI server adapter class 
handles the request by invoking the service’s business logic.

---

## Page 104

74
CHAPTER 3
Interprocess communication in a microservice architecture
 Many developers claim their HTTP-based APIs are RESTful. But as Roy Fielding
describes in a blog post, not all of them actually are (http://roy.gbiv.com/untangled/
2008/rest-apis-must-be-hypertext-driven). To understand why, let’s take a look at the
REST maturity model.
THE REST MATURITY MODEL
Leonard Richardson (no relation to your author) defines a very useful maturity model
for REST (http://martinfowler.com/articles/richardsonMaturityModel.html) that con-
sists of the following levels:
Level 0—Clients of a level 0 service invoke the service by making HTTP POST
requests to its sole URL endpoint. Each request specifies the action to perform,
the target of the action (for example, the business object), and any parameters.
Level 1—A level 1 service supports the idea of resources. To perform an action
on a resource, a client makes a POST request that specifies the action to per-
form and any parameters.
Level 2—A level 2 service uses HTTP verbs to perform actions: GET to retrieve,
POST to create, and PUT to update. The request query parameters and body, if
any, specify the actions' parameters. This enables services to use web infrastruc-
ture such as caching for GET requests.
Level 3—The design of a level 3 service is based on the terribly named
HATEOAS (Hypertext As The Engine Of Application State) principle. The
basic idea is that the representation of a resource returned by a GET request
contains links for performing actions on that resource. For example, a client
can cancel an order using a link in the representation returned by the GET
request that retrieved the order. The benefits of HATEOAS include no longer
having to hard-wire URLs into client code (www.infoq.com/news/2009/04/
hateoas-restful-api-advantages).
I encourage you to review the REST APIs at your organization to see which level they
correspond to. 
SPECIFYING REST APIS
As mentioned earlier in section 3.1, you must define your APIs using an interface defi-
nition language (IDL). Unlike older communication protocols like CORBA and
SOAP, REST did not originally have an IDL. Fortunately, the developer community
has rediscovered the value of an IDL for RESTful APIs. The most popular REST IDL is
the Open API Specification (www.openapis.org), which evolved from the Swagger
open source project. The Swagger project is a set of tools for developing and docu-
menting REST APIs. It includes tools that generate client stubs and server skeletons
from an interface definition. 
THE CHALLENGE OF FETCHING MULTIPLE RESOURCES IN A SINGLE REQUEST
REST resources are usually oriented around business objects, such as Consumer and
Order. Consequently, a common problem when designing a REST API is how to

---

## Page 105

75
Communicating using the synchronous Remote procedure invocation pattern
enable the client to retrieve multiple related objects in a single request. For example,
imagine that a REST client wanted to retrieve an Order and the Order's Consumer. A
pure REST API would require the client to make at least two requests, one for the
Order and another for its Consumer. A more complex scenario would require even
more round-trips and suffer from excessive latency.
 One solution to this problem is for an API to allow the client to retrieve related
resources when it gets a resource. For example, a client could retrieve an Order and its
Consumer using GET /orders/order-id-1345?expand=consumer. The query parame-
ter specifies the related resources to return with the Order. This approach works well
in many scenarios but it’s often insufficient for more complex scenarios. It’s also
potentially time consuming to implement. This has led to the increasing popularity of
alternative API technologies such as GraphQL (http://graphql.org) and Netflix Falcor
(http://netflix.github.io/falcor/), which are designed to support efficient data fetching. 
THE CHALLENGE OF MAPPING OPERATIONS TO HTTP VERBS
Another common REST API design problem is how to map the operations you want
to perform on a business object to an HTTP verb. A REST API should use PUT for
updates, but there may be multiple ways to update an order, including cancelling it,
revising the order, and so on. Also, an update might not be idempotent, which is a
requirement for using PUT. One solution is to define a sub-resource for updating a
particular aspect of a resource. The Order Service, for example, has a POST /orders/
{orderId}/cancel endpoint for cancelling orders, and a POST /orders/{orderId}/
revise endpoint for revising orders. Another solution is to specify a verb as a URL
query parameter. Sadly, neither solution is particularly RESTful.
 This problem with mapping operations to HTTP verbs has led to the growing pop-
ularity of alternatives to REST, such as gPRC, discussed shortly in section 3.2.2. But
first let’s look at the benefits and drawbacks of REST. 
BENEFITS AND DRAWBACKS OF REST
There are numerous benefits to using REST:
It’s simple and familiar.
You can test an HTTP API from within a browser using, for example, the Post-
man plugin, or from the command line using curl (assuming JSON or some
other text format is used).
It directly supports request/response style communication.
HTTP is, of course, firewall friendly.
It doesn’t require an intermediate broker, which simplifies the system’s archi-
tecture.
There are some drawbacks to using REST:
It only supports the request/response style of communication.
Reduced availability. Because the client and service communicate directly with-
out an intermediary to buffer messages, they must both be running for the
duration of the exchange.

---

## Page 106

76
CHAPTER 3
Interprocess communication in a microservice architecture
Clients must know the locations (URLs) of the service instances(s). As described
in section 3.2.4, this is a nontrivial problem in a modern application. Clients must
use what is known as a service discovery mechanism to locate service instances.
Fetching multiple resources in a single request is challenging.
It’s sometimes difficult to map multiple update operations to HTTP verbs.
Despite these drawbacks, REST seems to be the de facto standard for APIs, though
there are a couple of interesting alternatives. GraphQL, for example, implements
flexible, efficient data fetching. Chapter 8 discusses GraphQL and covers the API
gateway pattern.
 gRPC is another alternative to REST. Let’s take a look at how it works. 
3.2.2
Using gRPC
As mentioned in the preceding section, one challenge with using REST is that
because HTTP only provides a limited number of verbs, it’s not always straightforward
to design a REST API that supports multiple update operations. An IPC technology
that avoids this issue is gRPC (www.grpc.io), a framework for writing cross-language
clients and servers (see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Remote_procedure_call for
more). gRPC is a binary message-based protocol, and this means—as mentioned ear-
lier in the discussion of binary message formats—you’re forced to take an API-first
approach to service design. You define your gRPC APIs using a Protocol Buffers-based
IDL, which is Google’s language-neutral mechanism for serializing structured data.
You use the Protocol Buffer compiler to generate client-side stubs and server-side skel-
etons. The compiler can generate code for a variety of languages, including Java, C#,
NodeJS, and GoLang. Clients and servers exchange binary messages in the Protocol
Buffers format using HTTP/2.
 A gRPC API consists of one or more services and request/response message defini-
tions. A service definition is analogous to a Java interface and is a collection of strongly
typed methods. As well as supporting simple request/response RPC, gRPC support
streaming RPC. A server can reply with a stream of messages to the client. Alterna-
tively, a client can send a stream of messages to the server.
 gRPC uses Protocol Buffers as the message format. Protocol Buffers is, as men-
tioned earlier, an efficient, compact, binary format. It’s a tagged format. Each field of
a Protocol Buffers message is numbered and has a type code. A message recipient can
extract the fields that it needs and skip over the fields that it doesn’t recognize. As a
result, gRPC enables APIs to evolve while remaining backward-compatible.
 Listing 3.1 shows an excerpt of the gRPC API for the Order Service. It defines sev-
eral methods, including createOrder(). This method takes a CreateOrderRequest as
a parameter and returns a CreateOrderReply.
service OrderService {
rpc createOrder(CreateOrderRequest) returns (CreateOrderReply) {}
Listing 3.1
An excerpt of the gRPC API for the Order Service

---

## Page 107

77
Communicating using the synchronous Remote procedure invocation pattern
rpc cancelOrder(CancelOrderRequest) returns (CancelOrderReply) {}
rpc reviseOrder(ReviseOrderRequest) returns (ReviseOrderReply) {}
...
}
message CreateOrderRequest {
int64 restaurantId = 1;
int64 consumerId = 2;
repeated LineItem lineItems = 3;
...
}
message LineItem {
string menuItemId = 1;
int32 quantity = 2;
}
message CreateOrderReply {
int64 orderId = 1;
}
...
CreateOrderRequest and CreateOrderReply are typed messages. For example, Create-
OrderRequest message has a restaurantId field of type int64. The field’s tag value is 1.
 gRPC has several benefits:
It’s straightforward to design an API that has a rich set of update operations.
It has an efficient, compact IPC mechanism, especially when exchanging large
messages.
Bidirectional streaming enables both RPI and messaging styles of communication.
It enables interoperability between clients and services written in a wide range
of languages.
gRPC also has several drawbacks:
It takes more work for JavaScript clients to consume gRPC-based API than
REST/JSON-based APIs.
Older firewalls might not support HTTP/2.
gRPC is a compelling alternative to REST, but like REST, it’s a synchronous communi-
cation mechanism, so it also suffers from the problem of partial failure. Let’s take a
look at what that is and how to handle it. 
3.2.3
Handling partial failure using the Circuit breaker pattern
In a distributed system, whenever a service makes a synchronous request to another
service, there is an ever-present risk of partial failure. Because the client and the ser-
vice are separate processes, a service may not be able to respond in a timely way to a
client’s request. The service could be down because of a failure or for maintenance.
Or the service might be overloaded and responding extremely slowly to requests.

---

## Page 108

78
CHAPTER 3
Interprocess communication in a microservice architecture
Because the client is blocked waiting for a response, the danger is that the failure
could cascade to the client’s clients and so on and cause an outage.
Consider, for example, the scenario shown in figure 3.2, where the Order Service is
unresponsive. A mobile client makes a REST request to an API gateway, which, as dis-
cussed in chapter 8, is the entry point into the application for API clients. The API
gateway proxies the request to the unresponsive Order Service.
A naive implementation of the OrderServiceProxy would block indefinitely, waiting
for a response. Not only would that result in a poor user experience, but in many
applications it would consume a precious resource, such as a thread. Eventually the
API gateway would run out of resources and become unable to handle requests. The
entire API would be unavailable.
 It’s essential that you design your services to prevent partial failures from cascading
throughout the application. There are two parts to the solution:
You must use design RPI proxies, such as OrderServiceProxy, to handle unre-
sponsive remote services.
You need to decide how to recover from a failed remote service.
First we’ll look at how to write robust RPI proxies.
Pattern: Circuit breaker
An RPI proxy that immediately rejects invocations for a timeout period after the num-
ber of consecutive failures exceeds a specified threshold. See http://microservices
.io/patterns/reliability/circuit-breaker.html.
API
gateway
Unresponsive remote service
Mobile
app
Order
Service
Order
Service
proxy
Create
order
endpoint
POST/orders
POST/orders
Figure 3.2
An API gateway must protect itself from unresponsive services, such as the Order 
Service.

---

## Page 109

79
Communicating using the synchronous Remote procedure invocation pattern
DEVELOPING ROBUST RPI PROXIES
Whenever one service synchronously invokes another service, it should protect itself
using the approach described by Netflix (http://techblog.netflix.com/2012/02/fault-
tolerance-in-high-volume.html). This approach consists of a combination of the fol-
lowing mechanisms:
Network timeouts—Never block indefinitely and always use timeouts when wait-
ing for a response. Using timeouts ensures that resources are never tied up
indefinitely.
Limiting the number of outstanding requests from a client to a service—Impose an upper
bound on the number of outstanding requests that a client can make to a par-
ticular service. If the limit has been reached, it’s probably pointless to make
additional requests, and those attempts should fail immediately.
Circuit breaker pattern—Track the number of successful and failed requests,
and if the error rate exceeds some threshold, trip the circuit breaker so that
further attempts fail immediately. A large number of requests failing suggests
that the service is unavailable and that sending more requests is pointless.
After a timeout period, the client should try again, and, if successful, close the
circuit breaker.
Netflix Hystrix (https://github.com/Netflix/Hystrix) is an open source library that
implements these and other patterns. If you’re using the JVM, you should definitely
consider using Hystrix when implementing RPI proxies. And if you’re running in a
non-JVM environment, you should use an equivalent library. For example, the Polly
library is popular in the .NET community (https://github.com/App-vNext/Polly). 
RECOVERING FROM AN UNAVAILABLE SERVICE
Using a library such as Hystrix is only part of the solution. You must also decide on a
case-by-case basis how your services should recover from an unresponsive remote ser-
vice. One option is for a service to simply return an error to its client. For example,
this approach makes sense for the scenario shown in figure 3.2, where the request to
create an Order fails. The only option is for the API gateway to return an error to the
mobile client.
 In other scenarios, returning a fallback value, such as either a default value or a
cached response, may make sense. For example, chapter 7 describes how the API gate-
way could implement the findOrder() query operation by using the API composition
pattern. As figure 3.3 shows, its implementation of the GET /orders/{orderId} end-
point invokes several services, including the Order Service, Kitchen Service, and
Delivery Service, and combines the results.
 It’s likely that each service’s data isn’t equally important to the client. The data
from the Order Service is essential. If this service is unavailable, the API gateway
should return either a cached version of its data or an error. The data from the other
services is less critical. A client can, for example, display useful information to the user
even if the delivery status was unavailable. If the Delivery Service is unavailable,

---

## Page 110

80
CHAPTER 3
Interprocess communication in a microservice architecture
the API gateway should return either a cached version of its data or omit it from the
response.
 It’s essential that you design your services to handle partial failure, but that’s not
the only problem you need to solve when using RPI. Another problem is that in order
for one service to invoke another service using RPI, it needs to know the network
location of a service instance. On the surface this sounds simple, but in practice it’s
a challenging problem. You must use a service discovery mechanism. Let’s look at
how that works. 
3.2.4
Using service discovery
Say you’re writing some code that invokes a service that has a REST API. In order to
make a request, your code needs to know the network location (IP address and port)
of a service instance. In a traditional application running on physical hardware, the
network locations of service instances are usually static. For example, your code could
read the network locations from a configuration file that’s occasionally updated. But
in a modern, cloud-based microservices application, it’s usually not that simple. As is
shown in figure 3.4, a modern application is much more dynamic.
 Service instances have dynamically assigned network locations. Moreover, the set of
service instances changes dynamically because of autoscaling, failures, and upgrades.
Consequently, your client code must use a service discovery.
API
gateway
How to handle each
unresponsive service?
Unresponsive
service
Mobile
app
Get
order
endpoint
Get/orders/xyz
Order
Service
Order
Service
proxy
GET/orders/xyz
Kitchen
Service
Kitchen
Service
proxy
GET/tickets?orderId=xyz
Delivery
Service
Delivery
Service
proxy
GET/deliveries?orderId-xyz
...
Service
...
Service
proxy
Figure 3.3
The API gateway implements the GET /orders/{orderId} endpoint using API 
composition. It calls several services, aggregates their responses, and sends a response to the 
mobile app. The code that implements the endpoint must have a strategy for handling the failure 
of each service that it calls.

---

## Page 111

81
Communicating using the synchronous Remote procedure invocation pattern
OVERVIEW OF SERVICE DISCOVERY
As you’ve just seen, you can’t statically configure a client with the IP addresses of the
services. Instead, an application must use a dynamic service discovery mechanism. Ser-
vice discovery is conceptually quite simple: its key component is a service registry,
which is a database of the network locations of an application’s service instances.
 The service discovery mechanism updates the service registry when service instances
start and stop. When a client invokes a service, the service discovery mechanism que-
ries the service registry to obtain a list of available service instances and routes the
request to one of them.
 There are two main ways to implement service discovery:
The services and their clients interact directly with the service registry.
The deployment infrastructure handles service discovery. (I talk more about
that in chapter 12.)
Let’s look at each option. 
APPLYING THE APPLICATION-LEVEL SERVICE DISCOVERY PATTERNS
One way to implement service discovery is for the application’s services and their cli-
ents to interact with the service registry. Figure 3.5 shows how this works. A service
instance registers its network location with the service registry. A service client invokes
a service by first querying the service registry to obtain a list of service instances. It
then sends a request to one of those instances.
Service
instance 1
Order service
10.232.23.1
10.232.23.2
10.232.23.3
Service
instance 2
Service
client
Service
instance 3
?
Dynamically
assigned IP
Dynamically created
and destroyed
Figure 3.4
Service instances have dynamically assigned IP addresses.

---

## Page 112

82
CHAPTER 3
Interprocess communication in a microservice architecture
This approach to service discovery is a combination of two patterns. The first pat-
tern is the Self registration pattern. A service instance invokes the service registry’s
registration API to register its network location. It may also supply a health check
URL, described in more detail in chapter 11. The health check URL is an API end-
point that the service registry invokes periodically to verify that the service instance
is healthy and available to handle requests. A service registry may require a service
instance to periodically invoke a “heartbeat” API in order to prevent its registration
from expiring.
The second pattern is the Client-side discovery pattern. When a service client wants to
invoke a service, it queries the service registry to obtain a list of the service’s instances.
To improve performance, a client might cache the service instances. The service client
Pattern: Self registration
A service instance registers itself with the service registry. See http://microser-
vices.io/patterns/self-registration.html.
Service
instance 1
Order service
10.232.23.1
Load balance request
10.232.23.1
10.232.23.2
10.232.23.3
10.232.23.2
Register("order-service", "10.232.23.1")
Query("order-service")
Query API
Registration API
10.232.23.3
Service
instance 2
Service
instance 3
Service
discovery library
Service
client
Service
order-service
order-service
order-service
...
Service registry
IP address
10.232.23.1
10.232.23.2
10.232.23.3
...
RPC/rest
client
Service
discovery library
Service
discovery library
Service
discovery library
Client-side discovery
Self registration pattern
Figure 3.5
The service registry keeps track of the service instances. Clients query the service 
registry to find network locations of available service instances.

---

## Page 113

83
Communicating using the synchronous Remote procedure invocation pattern
then uses a load-balancing algorithm, such as a round-robin or random, to select a ser-
vice instance. It then makes a request to a select service instance.
Application-level service discovery has been popularized by Netflix and Pivotal. Netflix
developed and open sourced several components: Eureka, a highly available service
registry, the Eureka Java client, and Ribbon, a sophisticated HTTP client that supports
the Eureka client. Pivotal developed Spring Cloud, a Spring-based framework that
makes it remarkably easy to use the Netflix components. Spring Cloud-based services
automatically register with Eureka, and Spring Cloud-based clients automatically use
Eureka for service discovery.
 One benefit of application-level service discovery is that it handles the scenario
when services are deployed on multiple deployment platforms. Imagine, for example,
you’ve deployed only some of services on Kubernetes, discussed in chapter 12, and the
rest is running in a legacy environment. Application-level service discovery using
Eureka, for example, works across both environments, whereas Kubernetes-based ser-
vice discovery only works within Kubernetes.
 One drawback of application-level service discovery is that you need a service dis-
covery library for every language—and possibly framework—that you use. Spring
Cloud only helps Spring developers. If you’re using some other Java framework or a
non-JVM language such as NodeJS or GoLang, you must find some other service dis-
covery framework. Another drawback of application-level service discovery is that
you’re responsible for setting up and managing the service registry, which is a distrac-
tion. As a result, it’s usually better to use a service discovery mechanism that’s pro-
vided by the deployment infrastructure. 
APPLYING THE PLATFORM-PROVIDED SERVICE DISCOVERY PATTERNS
Later in chapter 12 you’ll learn that many modern deployment platforms such as
Docker and Kubernetes have a built-in service registry and service discovery mecha-
nism. The deployment platform gives each service a DNS name, a virtual IP (VIP)
address, and a DNS name that resolves to the VIP address. A service client makes a
request to the DNS name/VIP, and the deployment platform automatically routes the
request to one of the available service instances. As a result, service registration, ser-
vice discovery, and request routing are entirely handled by the deployment platform.
Figure 3.6 shows how this works.
 The deployment platform includes a service registry that tracks the IP addresses of
the deployed services. In this example, a client accesses the Order Service using the
Pattern: Client-side discovery
A service client retrieves the list of available service instances from the service reg-
istry and load balances across them. See http://microservices.io/patterns/client-
side-discovery.html.

---

## Page 114

84
CHAPTER 3
Interprocess communication in a microservice architecture
DNS name order-service, which resolves to the virtual IP address 10.1.3.4. The
deployment platform automatically load balances requests across the three instances
of the Order Service.
 This approach is a combination of two patterns:
3rd party registration pattern—Instead of a service registering itself with the ser-
vice registry, a third party called the registrar, which is typically part of the
deployment platform, handles the registration.
Server-side discovery pattern—Instead of a client querying the service registry, it
makes a request to a DNS name, which resolves to a request router that queries
the service registry and load balances requests.
Service
order-service
order-service
order-service
...
Service registry
IP address
10.232.23.1
10.232.23.2
10.232.23.3
...
Service
client
GET http://order-service/...
Deployment platform
RPC/rest
client
Service
instance 1
Order service
Observes
10.232.23.1
10.232.24.99
Service
instance 2
Service
instance 3
Platform
router
Queries
Updates
10.232.23.2
10.232.23.3
Registrar
3rd party registration
Server-side discovery
Service DNS name
resolves to service VIP
Service virtual IP address (VIP)
Figure 3.6
The platform is responsible for service registration, discovery, and request routing. Service 
instances are registered with the service registry by the registrar. Each service has a network location, 
a DNS name/virtual IP address. A client makes a request to the service’s network location. The router 
queries the service registry and load balances requests across the available service instances.

---

## Page 115

85
Communicating using the Asynchronous messaging pattern
The key benefit of platform-provided service discovery is that all aspects of service dis-
covery are entirely handled by the deployment platform. Neither the services nor the
clients contain any service discovery code. Consequently, the service discovery mecha-
nism is readily available to all services and clients regardless of which language or
framework they’re written in.
 One drawback of platform-provided service discovery is that it only supports the
discovery of services that have been deployed using the platform. For example, as
mentioned earlier when describing application-level discovery, Kubernetes-based dis-
covery only works for services running on Kubernetes. Despite this limitation, I rec-
ommend using platform-provided service discovery whenever possible.
 Now that we’ve looked at synchronous IPC using REST or gRPC, let’s take a look at
the alternative: asynchronous, message-based communication. 
3.3
Communicating using the Asynchronous messaging 
pattern
When using messaging, services communicate by asynchronously exchanging mes-
sages. A messaging-based application typically uses a message broker, which acts as an
intermediary between the services, although another option is to use a brokerless
architecture, where the services communicate directly with each other. A service client
makes a request to a service by sending it a message. If the service instance is expected
to reply, it will do so by sending a separate message back to the client. Because the
communication is asynchronous, the client doesn’t block waiting for a reply. Instead,
the client is written assuming that the reply won’t be received immediately.
I start this section with an overview of messaging. I show how to describe a messaging
architecture independently of messaging technology. Next I compare and contrast
Pattern: 3rd party registration
Service instances are automatically registered with the service registry by a third party.
See http://microservices.io/patterns/3rd-party-registration.html.
Pattern: Server-side discovery
A client makes a request to a router, which is responsible for service discovery. See
http://microservices.io/patterns/server-side-discovery.html.
Pattern: Messaging
A client invokes a service using asynchronous messaging. See http://microservices
.io/patterns/communication-style/messaging.html.

---

## Page 116

86
CHAPTER 3
Interprocess communication in a microservice architecture
brokerless and broker-based architectures and describe the criteria for selecting a
message broker. I then discuss several important topics, including scaling consum-
ers while preserving message ordering, detecting and discarding duplicate messages,
and sending and receiving messages as part of a database transaction. Let’s begin by
looking at how messaging works.
3.3.1
Overview of messaging
A useful model of messaging is defined in the book Enterprise Integration Patterns
(Addison-Wesley Professional, 2003) by Gregor Hohpe and Bobby Woolf. In this
model, messages are exchanged over message channels. A sender (an application or
service) writes a message to a channel, and a receiver (an application or service) reads
messages from a channel. Let’s look at messages and then look at channels.
ABOUT MESSAGES
A message consists of a header and a message body (www.enterpriseintegrationpatterns
.com/Message.html). The header is a collection of name-value pairs, metadata that
describes the data being sent. In addition to name-value pairs provided by the mes-
sage’s sender, the message header contains name-value pairs, such as a unique message
id generated by either the sender or the messaging infrastructure, and an optional
return address, which specifies the message channel that a reply should be written to.
The message body is the data being sent, in either text or binary format.
 There are several different kinds of messages:
Document—A generic message that contains only data. The receiver decides how
to interpret it. The reply to a command is an example of a document message.
Command—A message that’s the equivalent of an RPC request. It specifies the
operation to invoke and its parameters.
Event—A message indicating that something notable has occurred in the sender.
An event is often a domain event, which represents a state change of a domain
object such as an Order, or a Customer.
The approach to the microservice architecture described in this book uses commands
and events extensively.
 Let’s now look at channels, the mechanism by which services communicate. 
ABOUT MESSAGE CHANNELS
As figure 3.7 shows, messages are exchanged over channels (www.enterpriseintegra-
tionpatterns.com/MessageChannel.html). The business logic in the sender invokes a
sending port interface, which encapsulates the underlying communication mechanism.
The sending port is implemented by a message sender adapter class, which sends a mes-
sage to a receiver via a message channel. A message channel is an abstraction of the
messaging infrastructure. A message handler adapter class in the receiver is invoked to
handle the message. It invokes a receiving port interface implemented by the consumer’s

---

## Page 117

87
Communicating using the Asynchronous messaging pattern
business logic. Any number of senders can send messages to a channel. Similarly, any
number of receivers can receive messages from a channel.
 There are two kinds of channels: point-to-point (www.enterpriseintegrationpatterns
.com/PointToPointChannel.html) and publish-subscribe (www.enterpriseintegration-
patterns.com/PublishSubscribeChannel.html):
A point-to-point channel delivers a message to exactly one of the consumers that
is reading from the channel. Services use point-to-point channels for the one-
to-one interaction styles described earlier. For example, a command message is
often sent over a point-to-point channel.
A publish-subscribe channel delivers each message to all of the attached consum-
ers. Services use publish-subscribe channels for the one-to-many interaction
styles described earlier. For example, an event message is usually sent over a
publish-subscribe channel. 
3.3.2
Implementing the interaction styles using messaging
One of the valuable features of messaging is that it’s flexible enough to support all the
interaction styles described in section 3.1.1. Some interaction styles are directly imple-
mented by messaging. Others must be implemented on top of messaging.
 Let’s look at how to implement each interaction style, starting with request/response
and asynchronous request/response.
IMPLEMENTING REQUEST/RESPONSE AND ASYNCHRONOUS REQUEST/RESPONSE
When a client and service interact using either request/response or asynchronous
request/response, the client sends a request and the service sends back a reply. The
Business
logic
invokes
invokes
Business logic
Sending port
Receiving port
Sender
Receiver
Message
sender
Message
Message
channel
Receives
Sends
Header
Body
Messaging
infrastructure
Message
handler
Service
Figure 3.7
The business logic in the sender invokes a sending port interface, which is implemented by a  message 
sender adapter. The message sender sends a message to a receiver via a message channel. The message channel 
is an abstraction of messaging infrastructure. A message handler adapter in the receiver is invoked to handle the 
message. It invokes the receiving port interface implemented by the receiver’s business logic.

---

## Page 118

88
CHAPTER 3
Interprocess communication in a microservice architecture
difference between the two interaction styles is that with request/response the client
expects the service to respond immediately, whereas with asynchronous request/
response there is no such expectation. Messaging is inherently asynchronous, so only
provides asynchronous request/response. But a client could block until a reply is
received.
 The client and service implement the asynchronous request/response style inter-
action by exchanging a pair of messages. As figure 3.8 shows, the client sends a com-
mand message, which specifies the operation to perform, and parameters, to a point-
to-point messaging channel owned by a service. The service processes the requests
and sends a reply message, which contains the outcome, to a point-to-point channel
owned by the client.
The client must tell the service where to send a reply message and must match reply mes-
sages to requests. Fortunately, solving these two problems isn’t that difficult. The client
sends a command message that has a reply channel header. The server writes the reply mes-
sage, which contains a correlation id that has the same value as message identifier, to the reply
channel. The client uses the correlation id to match the reply message with the request.
 Because the client and service communicate using messaging, the interaction is
inherently asynchronous. In theory, a messaging client could block until it receives a
reply, but in practice the client will process replies asynchronously. What’s more,
replies are typically processed by any one of the client’s instances. 
Request
Sends
Reads
Reads
Sends
MessageId: msgId
ReturnAddress: ReplyChannel
Body
CorrelationId:msgId
Body
Request channel
Reply channel
Reply
Speciﬁes
Client
Service
Client sends message containing
msgId and a reply channel.
Service sends reply to the speciﬁed reply
channel. The reply contains a correlationId,
which is the request’s msgId.
Figure 3.8
Implementing asynchronous request/response by including a reply channel and message 
identifier in the request message. The receiver processes the message and sends the reply to the 
specified reply channel.

---

## Page 119

89
Communicating using the Asynchronous messaging pattern
IMPLEMENTING ONE-WAY NOTIFICATIONS
Implementing one-way notifications is straightforward using asynchronous messaging.
The client sends a message, typically a command message, to a point-to-point channel
owned by the service. The service subscribes to the channel and processes the mes-
sage. It doesn’t send back a reply. 
IMPLEMENTING PUBLISH/SUBSCRIBE
Messaging has built-in support for the publish/subscribe style of interaction. A client
publishes a message to a publish-subscribe channel that is read by multiple consum-
ers. As described in chapters 4 and 5, services use publish/subscribe to publish
domain events, which represent changes to domain objects. The service that publishes
the domain events owns a publish-subscribe channel, whose name is derived from the
domain class. For example, the Order Service publishes Order events to an Order
channel, and the Delivery Service publishes Delivery events to a Delivery chan-
nel. A service that’s interested in a particular domain object’s events only has to sub-
scribe to the appropriate channel. 
IMPLEMENTING PUBLISH/ASYNC RESPONSES
The publish/async responses interaction style is a higher-level style of interaction that’s
implemented by combining elements of publish/subscribe and request/response. A cli-
ent publishes a message that specifies a reply channel header to a publish-subscribe
channel. A consumer writes a reply message containing a correlation id to the reply
channel. The client gathers the responses by using the correlation id to match the reply
messages with the request.
 Each service in your application that has an asynchronous API will use one or
more of these implementation techniques. A service that has an asynchronous API for
invoking operations will have a message channel for requests. Similarly, a service that
publishes events will publish them to an event message channel.
 As described in section 3.1.2, it’s important to write an API specification for a ser-
vice. Let’s look at how to do that for an asynchronous API. 
3.3.3
Creating an API specification for a messaging-based service API
The specification for a service’s asynchronous API must, as figure 3.9 shows, specify
the names of the message channels, the message types that are exchanged over each
channel, and their formats. You must also describe the format of the messages using a
standard such as JSON, XML, or Protobuf. But unlike with REST and Open API, there
isn’t a widely adopted standard for documenting the channels and the message types.
Instead, you need to write an informal document.
 A service’s asynchronous API consists of operations, invoked by clients, and events,
published by the services. They’re documented in different ways. Let’s take a look at
each one, starting with operations.

---

## Page 120

90
CHAPTER 3
Interprocess communication in a microservice architecture
DOCUMENTING ASYNCHRONOUS OPERATIONS
A service’s operations can be invoked using one of two different interaction styles:
Request/async response-style API—This consists of the service’s command message
channel, the types and formats of the command message types that the service
accepts, and the types and formats of the reply messages sent by the service.
One-way notification-style API—This consists of the service’s command message
channel and the types and format of the command message types that the ser-
vice accepts.
A service may use the same request channel for both asynchronous request/response
and one-way notification. 
DOCUMENTING PUBLISHED EVENTS
A service can also publish events using a publish/subscribe interaction style. The spec-
ification of this style of API consists of the event channel and the types and formats of
the event messages that are published by the service to the channel.
 The messages and channels model of messaging is a great abstraction and a good
way to design a service’s asynchronous API. But in order to implement a service you
need to choose a messaging technology and determine how to implement your design
using its capabilities. Let’s take a look at what’s involved. 
3.3.4
Using a message broker
A messaging-based application typically uses a message broker, an infrastructure service
through which the service communicates. But a broker-based architecture isn’t the
only messaging architecture. You can also use a brokerless-based messaging architec-
ture, in which the services communicate with one another directly. The two approaches,
shown in figure 3.10, have different trade-offs, but usually a broker-based architecture
is a better approach.
Service
Command
query
API
Service API
Replies
R
R
Events
R
Event
publisher
«Command channel»
«Event channel»
«Reply channel»
Commands
C
C
C
Figure 3.9
A service’s asynchronous API consists of message channels and command, reply, and 
event message types.

---

## Page 121

91
Communicating using the Asynchronous messaging pattern
This book focuses on broker-based architecture, but it’s worthwhile to take a quick look
at the brokerless architecture, because there may be scenarios where you find it useful.
BROKERLESS MESSAGING
In a brokerless architecture, services can exchange messages directly. ZeroMQ (http://
zeromq.org) is a popular brokerless messaging technology. It’s both a specification
and a set of libraries for different languages. It supports a variety of transports, includ-
ing TCP, UNIX-style domain sockets, and multicast.
 The brokerless architecture has some benefits:
Allows lighter network traffic and better latency, because messages go directly
from the sender to the receiver, instead of having to go from the sender to the
message broker and from there to the receiver
Eliminates the possibility of the message broker being a performance bottle-
neck or a single point of failure
Features less operational complexity, because there is no message broker to set
up and maintain
As appealing as these benefits may seem, brokerless messaging has significant drawbacks:
Services need to know about each other’s locations and must therefore use one
of the discovery mechanisms describer earlier in section 3.2.4.
It offers reduced availability, because both the sender and receiver of a message
must be available while the message is being exchanged.
Implementing mechanisms, such as guaranteed delivery, is more challenging.
Service
Service
Service
Service
Service
Service
Message broker
Vs.
Brokerless architecture
Broker-based architecture
Figure 3.10
The services in brokerless architecture communicate directly, whereas the services 
in a broker-based architecture communicate via a message broker.

---

## Page 122

92
CHAPTER 3
Interprocess communication in a microservice architecture
In fact, some of these drawbacks, such as reduced availability and the need for service
discovery, are the same as when using synchronous, response/response.
 Because of these limitations, most enterprise applications use a message broker-
based architecture. Let’s look at how that works. 
OVERVIEW OF BROKER-BASED MESSAGING
A message broker is an intermediary through which all messages flow. A sender writes
the message to the message broker, and the message broker delivers it to the receiver.
An important benefit of using a message broker is that the sender doesn’t need to
know the network location of the consumer. Another benefit is that a message broker
buffers messages until the consumer is able to process them.
 There are many message brokers to chose from. Examples of popular open source
message brokers include the following:
ActiveMQ (http://activemq.apache.org)
RabbitMQ (https://www.rabbitmq.com)
Apache Kafka (http://kafka.apache.org)
There are also cloud-based messaging services, such as AWS Kinesis (https://aws.amazon
.com/kinesis/) and AWS SQS (https://aws.amazon.com/sqs/).
 When selecting a message broker, you have various factors to consider, including
the following:
Supported programming languages—You probably should pick one that supports a
variety of programming languages.
Supported messaging standards—Does the message broker support any standards,
such as AMQP and STOMP, or is it proprietary?
Messaging ordering—Does the message broker preserve ordering of messages?
Delivery guarantees—What kind of delivery guarantees does the broker make?
Persistence—Are messages persisted to disk and able to survive broker crashes?
Durability—If a consumer reconnects to the message broker, will it receive the
messages that were sent while it was disconnected?
Scalability—How scalable is the message broker?
Latency—What is the end-to-end latency?
Competing consumers—Does the message broker support competing consumers?
Each broker makes different trade-offs. For example, a very low-latency broker might
not preserve ordering, make no guarantees to deliver messages, and only store mes-
sages in memory. A messaging broker that guarantees delivery and reliably stores
messages on disk will probably have higher latency. Which kind of message broker is
the best fit depends on your application’s requirements. It’s even possible that differ-
ent parts of your application will have different messaging requirements.
 It’s likely, though, that messaging ordering and scalability are essential. Let’s now
look at how to implement message channels using a message broker.

---

## Page 123

93
Communicating using the Asynchronous messaging pattern
IMPLEMENTING MESSAGE CHANNELS USING A MESSAGE BROKER
Each message broker implements the message channel concept in a different way. As
table 3.2 shows, JMS message brokers such as ActiveMQ have queues and topics.
AMQP-based message brokers such as RabbitMQ have exchanges and queues. Apache
Kafka has topics, AWS Kinesis has streams, and AWS SQS has queues. What’s more,
some message brokers offer more flexible messaging than the message and channels
abstraction described in this chapter.
Almost all the message brokers described here support both point-to-point and publish-
subscribe channels. The one exception is AWS SQS, which only supports point-to-point
channels.
 Now let’s look at the benefits and drawbacks of broker-based messaging. 
BENEFITS AND DRAWBACKS OF BROKER-BASED MESSAGING
There are many advantages to using broker-based messaging:
Loose coupling—A client makes a request by simply sending a message to the
appropriate channel. The client is completely unaware of the service instances.
It doesn’t need to use a discovery mechanism to determine the location of a ser-
vice instance.
Message buffering—The message broker buffers messages until they can be pro-
cessed. With a synchronous request/response protocol such as HTTP, both the
client and service must be available for the duration of the exchange. With mes-
saging, though, messages will queue up until they can be processed by the con-
sumer. This means, for example, that an online store can accept orders from
customers even when the order-fulfillment system is slow or unavailable. The
messages will simply queue up until they can be processed.
Flexible communication—Messaging supports all the interaction styles described
earlier.
Explicit interprocess communication—RPC-based mechanism attempts to make invok-
ing a remote service look the same as calling a local service. But due to the laws
of physics and the possibility of partial failure, they’re in fact quite different.
Table 3.2
Each message broker implements the message channel concept in a different way.
Message broker
Point-to-point channel
Publish-subscribe channel
JMS
Queue
Topic
Apache Kafka
Topic
Topic
AMQP-based brokers, such as 
RabbitMQ
Exchange + Queue
Fanout exchange and a queue per 
consumer
AWS Kinesis
Stream
Stream
AWS SQS
Queue
—

---

## Page 124

94
CHAPTER 3
Interprocess communication in a microservice architecture
Messaging makes these differences very explicit, so developers aren’t lulled into
a false sense of security.
There are some downsides to using messaging:
Potential performance bottleneck—There is a risk that the message broker could be
a performance bottleneck. Fortunately, many modern message brokers are
designed to be highly scalable.
Potential single point of failure—It’s essential that the message broker is highly
available—otherwise, system reliability will be impacted. Fortunately, most mod-
ern brokers have been designed to be highly available.
Additional operational complexity—The messaging system is yet another system
component that must be installed, configured, and operated.
Let’s look at some design issues you might face. 
3.3.5
Competing receivers and message ordering
One challenge is how to scale out message receivers while preserving message order-
ing. It’s a common requirement to have multiple instances of a service in order to pro-
cess messages concurrently. Moreover, even a single service instance will probably use
threads to concurrently process multiple messages. Using multiple threads and service
instances to concurrently process messages increases the throughput of the applica-
tion. But the challenge with processing messages concurrently is ensuring that each
message is processed once and in order.
 For example, imagine that there are three instances of a service reading from the
same point-to-point channel and that a sender publishes Order Created, Order Updated,
and Order Cancelled event messages sequentially. A simplistic messaging implementa-
tion could concurrently deliver each message to a different receiver. Because of delays
due to network issues or garbage collections, messages might be processed out of order,
which would result in strange behavior. In theory, a service instance might process the
Order Cancelled message before another service processes the Order Created message!
 A common solution, used by modern message brokers like Apache Kafka and AWS
Kinesis, is to use sharded (partitioned) channels. Figure 3.11 shows how this works.
There are three parts to the solution:
1
A sharded channel consists of two or more shards, each of which behaves like
a channel.
2
The sender specifies a shard key in the message’s header, which is typically an
arbitrary string or sequence of bytes. The message broker uses a shard key to
assign the message to a particular shard/partition. It might, for example, select
the shard by computing the hash of the shard key modulo the number of shards.
3
The messaging broker groups together multiple instances of a receiver and
treats them as the same logical receiver. Apache Kafka, for example, uses the
term consumer group. The message broker assigns each shard to a single receiver.
It reassigns shards when receivers start up and shut down.

---

## Page 125

95
Communicating using the Asynchronous messaging pattern
In this example, each Order event message has the orderId as its shard key. Each event
for a particular order is published to the same shard, which is read by a single consumer
instance. As a result, these messages are guaranteed to be processed in order. 
3.3.6
Handling duplicate messages
Another challenge you must tackle when using messaging is dealing with duplicate
messages. A message broker should ideally deliver each message only once, but guar-
anteeing exactly-once messaging is usually too costly. Instead, most message brokers
promise to deliver a message at least once.
 When the system is working normally, a message broker that guarantees at-least-
once delivery will deliver each message only once. But a failure of a client, network, or
message broker can result in a message being delivered multiple times. Say a client
crashes after processing a message and updating its database—but before acknowledg-
ing the message. The message broker will deliver the unacknowledged message again,
either to that client when it restarts or to another replica of the client.
 Ideally, you should use a message broker that preserves ordering when redeliver-
ing messages. Imagine that the client processes an Order Created event followed by
an Order Cancelled event for the same Order, and that somehow the Order Created
event wasn’t acknowledged. The message broker should redeliver both the Order Cre-
ated and Order Cancelled events. If it only redelivers the Order Created, the client
may undo the cancelling of the Order.
 There are a couple of different ways to handle duplicate messages:
Write idempotent message handlers.
Track messages and discard duplicates.
Let’s look at each option.
Routes based on a
hash of the shard-key
Receiver A
instance 1
Receiver A
instance 2
Receiver
Shard
assignment
Receiver
...
Router
Shard 0
Channel
Logical receiver A
Shard 1
Shard ...
Create order
request
Shard-key:orderId
Sender
Figure 3.11
Scaling consumers while preserving message ordering by using a sharded (partitioned) message 
channel. The sender includes the shard key in the message. The message broker writes the message to a shard 
determined by the shard key. The message broker assigns each partition to an instance of the replicated receiver.

---

## Page 126

96
CHAPTER 3
Interprocess communication in a microservice architecture
WRITING IDEMPOTENT MESSAGE HANDLERS
If the application logic that processes messages is idempotent, then duplicate mes-
sages are harmless. Application logic is idempotent if calling it multiple times with the
same input values has no additional effect. For instance, cancelling an already-cancelled
order is an idempotent operation. So is creating an order with a client-supplied ID.
An idempotent message handler can be safely executed multiple times, provided that
the message broker preserves ordering when redelivering messages.
 Unfortunately, application logic is often not idempotent. Or you may be using a
message broker that doesn’t preserve ordering when redelivering messages. Duplicate
or out-of-order messages can cause bugs. In this situation, you must write message
handlers that track messages and discard duplicate messages. 
TRACKING MESSAGES AND DISCARDING DUPLICATES
Consider, for example, a message handler that authorizes a consumer credit card. It
must authorize the card exactly once for each order. This example of application logic
has a different effect each time it’s invoked. If duplicate messages caused the message
handler to execute this logic multiple times, the application would behave incorrectly.
The message handler that executes this kind of application logic must become idem-
potent by detecting and discarding duplicate messages.
 A simple solution is for a message consumer to track the messages that it has pro-
cessed using the message id and discard any duplicates. It could, for example, store
the message id of each message that it consumed in a database table. Figure 3.12
shows how to do this using a dedicated table.
When a consumer handles a message, it records the message id in the database table as
part of the transaction that creates and updates business entities. In this example, the
consumer inserts a row containing the message id into a PROCESSED_MESSAGES table. If a
message is a duplicate, the INSERT will fail and the consumer can discard the message.
MSG_ID
PROCESSED_MESSAGE table
INSERT
INSERT will fail for
duplicate messages.
UPDATE
...
...
Application table
xyz
Transaction
Message
id: xyz
Consumer
Figure 3.12
A consumer detects and discards duplicate messages by recording the IDs of 
processed messages in a database table. If a message has been processed before, the INSERT 
into the PROCESSED_MESSAGES table will fail.

---

## Page 127

97
Communicating using the Asynchronous messaging pattern
 Another option is for a  message handler to record message ids in an application
table instead of a dedicated table. This approach is particularly useful when using a
NoSQL database that has a limited transaction model, so it doesn’t support updat-
ing two tables as part of a database transaction. Chapter 7 shows an example of this
approach. 
3.3.7
Transactional messaging
A service often needs to publish messages as part of a transaction that updates the
database. For instance, throughout this book you see examples of services that publish
domain events whenever they create or update business entities. Both the database
update and the sending of the message must happen within a transaction. Otherwise,
a service might update the database and then crash, for example, before sending the
message. If the service doesn’t perform these two operations atomically, a failure
could leave the system in an inconsistent state.
 The traditional solution is to use a distributed transaction that spans the database
and the message broker. But as you’ll learn in chapter 4, distributed transactions
aren’t a good choice for modern applications. Moreover, many modern brokers such
as Apache Kafka don’t support distributed transactions.
 As a result, an application must use a different mechanism to reliably publish mes-
sages. Let’s look at how that works.
USING A DATABASE TABLE AS A MESSAGE QUEUE
Let’s imagine that your application is using a relational database. A straightforward
way to reliably publish messages is to apply the Transactional outbox pattern. This
pattern uses a database table as a temporary message queue. As figure 3.13 shows, a
service that sends messages has an OUTBOX database table. As part of the database
Order
Service
Read
OUTBOX
table
Publish
...
...
ORDER table
INSERT,
UPDATE,DELETE
INSERT
Database
Message
relay
Transaction
OUTBOX table
Message
broker
Figure 3.13
A service reliably publishes a message by inserting it into an OUTBOX table as part of the transaction 
that updates the database. The Message Relay reads the OUTBOX table and publishes the messages to a 
message broker.

---

## Page 128

98
CHAPTER 3
Interprocess communication in a microservice architecture
transaction that creates, updates, and deletes business objects, the service sends mes-
sages by inserting them into the OUTBOX table. Atomicity is guaranteed because this is a
local ACID transaction.
 The OUTBOX table acts a temporary message queue. The MessageRelay is a compo-
nent that reads the OUTBOX table and publishes the messages to a message broker.
You can use a similar approach with some NoSQL databases. Each business entity
stored as a record in the database has an attribute that is a list of messages that need
to be published. When a service updates an entity in the database, it appends a mes-
sage to that list. This is atomic because it’s done with a single database operation. The
challenge, though, is efficiently finding those business entities that have events and
publishing them.
 There are a couple of different ways to move messages from the database to the
message broker. We’ll look at each one. 
PUBLISHING EVENTS BY USING THE POLLING PUBLISHER PATTERN
If the application uses a relational database, a very simple way to publish the messages
inserted into the OUTBOX table is for the MessageRelay to poll the table for unpub-
lished messages. It periodically queries the table:
SELECT * FROM OUTBOX ORDERED BY ... ASC
Next, the MessageRelay publishes those messages to the message broker, sending one
to its destination message channel. Finally, it deletes those messages from the OUTBOX
table:
BEGIN
DELETE FROM OUTBOX WHERE ID in (....)
COMMIT
Polling the database is a simple approach that works reasonably well at low scale. The
downside is that frequently polling the database can be expensive. Also, whether you
can use this approach with a NoSQL database depends on its querying capabilities.
That’s because rather than querying an OUTBOX table, the application must query the
Pattern: Transactional outbox
Publish an event or message as part of a database transaction by saving it in an OUT-
BOX in the database. See http://microservices.io/patterns/data/transactional-out-
box.html.
Pattern: Polling publisher
Publish messages by polling the outbox in the database. See http://microser-
vices.io/patterns/data/polling-publisher.html.

---

## Page 129

99
Communicating using the Asynchronous messaging pattern
business entities, and that may or may not be possible to do efficiently. Because of
these drawbacks and limitations, it’s often better—and in some cases, necessary—to
use the more sophisticated and performant approach of tailing the database transac-
tion log. 
PUBLISHING EVENTS BY APPLYING THE TRANSACTION LOG TAILING PATTERN
A sophisticated solution is for MessageRelay to tail the database transaction log (also
called the commit log). Every committed update made by an application is repre-
sented as an entry in the database’s transaction log. A transaction log miner can read
the transaction log and publish each change as a message to the message broker. Fig-
ure 3.14 shows how this approach works.
The Transaction Log Miner reads the transaction log entries. It converts each relevant
log entry corresponding to an inserted message into a message and publishes that mes-
sage to the message broker. This approach can be used to publish messages written to
an OUTBOX table in an RDBMS or messages appended to records in a NoSQL database.
Pattern: Transaction log tailing
Publish changes made to the database by tailing the transaction log. See http://micro-
services.io/patterns/data/transaction-log-tailing.html.
Database
OUTBOX table
Transaction log
Transaction log
miner
INSERT INTO OUTBOX ...
Message
broker
Changes
Publish
Order
Service
Committed inserts into
the OUTBOX table are
recorded in the database’s
transaction log.
Reads the transaction log
Figure 3.14
A service publishes messages inserted into the OUTBOX table by mining 
the database’s transaction log.

---

## Page 130

100
CHAPTER 3
Interprocess communication in a microservice architecture
There are a few examples of this approach in use:
Debezium (http://debezium.io)—An open source project that publishes data-
base changes to the Apache Kafka message broker.
LinkedIn Databus (https://github.com/linkedin/databus)—An open source proj-
ect that mines the Oracle transaction log and publishes the changes as events.
LinkedIn uses Databus to synchronize various derived data stores with the sys-
tem of record.
DynamoDB streams (http://docs.aws.amazon.com/amazondynamodb/latest/
developerguide/Streams.html)—DynamoDB streams contain the time-ordered
sequence of changes (creates, updates, and deletes) made to the items in a
DynamoDB table in the last 24 hours. An application can read those changes
from the stream and, for example, publish them as events.
Eventuate Tram (https://github.com/eventuate-tram/eventuate-tram-core)—Your
author’s very own open source transaction messaging library that uses MySQL
binlog protocol, Postgres WAL, or polling to read changes made to an OUTBOX
table and publish them to Apache Kafka.
Although this approach is obscure, it works remarkably well. The challenge is that
implementing it requires some development effort. You could, for example, write low-
level code that calls database-specific APIs. Alternatively, you could use an open source
framework such as Debezium that publishes changes made by an application to MySQL,
Postgres, or MongoDB to Apache Kafka. The drawback of using Debezium is that its
focus is capturing changes at the database level and that APIs for sending and receiving
messages are outside of its scope. That’s why I created the Eventuate Tram framework,
which provides the messaging APIs as well as transaction tailing and polling. 
3.3.8
Libraries and frameworks for messaging
A service needs to use a library to send and receive messages. One approach is to use
the message broker’s client library, although there are several problems with using
such a library directly:
The client library couples business logic that publishes messages to the message
broker APIs.
A message broker’s client library is typically low level and requires many lines of
code to send or receive a message. As a developer, you don’t want to repeatedly
write boilerplate code. Also, as the author of this book I don’t want the example
code cluttered with low-level boilerplate.
The client library usually provides only the basic mechanism to send and
receive messages and doesn’t support the higher-level interaction styles.
A better approach is to use a higher-level library or framework that hides the low-level
details and directly supports the higher-level interaction styles. For simplicity, the
examples in this book use my Eventuate Tram framework. It has a simple, easy-to-
understand API that hides the complexity of using the message broker. Besides an API

---

## Page 131

101
Communicating using the Asynchronous messaging pattern
for sending and receiving messages, Eventuate Tram also supports higher-level inter-
action styles such as asynchronous request/response and domain event publishing.
Eventuate Tram also implements two important mechanisms:
Transactional messaging—It publishes messages as part of a database transaction.
Duplicate message detection—The Eventuate Tram message consumer detects and
discards duplicate messages, which is essential for ensuring that a consumer
processes messages exactly once, as discussed in section 3.3.6.
Let’s take a look at the Eventuate Tram APIs.
BASIC MESSAGING
The basic messaging API consists of two Java interfaces: MessageProducer and Message-
Consumer. A producer service uses the MessageProducer interface to publish messages
to message channels. Here’s an example of using this interface:
MessageProducer messageProducer = ...;
String channel = ...;
String payload = ...;
messageProducer.send(destination, MessageBuilder.withPayload(payload).build())
A consumer service uses the MessageConsumer interface to subscribe to messages:
MessageConsumer messageConsumer;
messageConsumer.subscribe(subscriberId, Collections.singleton(destination), 
message -> { ... })
MessageProducer and MessageConsumer are the foundation of the higher-level APIs
for asynchronous request/response and domain event publishing.
 Let’s talk about how to publish and subscribe to events. 
What!? Why the Eventuate frameworks?
The code samples in this book use the open source Eventuate frameworks I’ve devel-
oped for transactional messaging, event sourcing, and sagas. I chose to use my
frameworks because, unlike with, say, dependency injection and the Spring frame-
work, there are no widely adopted frameworks for many of the features the microser-
vice architecture requires. Without the Eventuate Tram framework, many examples
would have to use the low-level messaging APIs directly, making them much more
complicated and obscuring important concepts. Or they would use a framework that
isn’t widely adopted, which would also provoke criticism.
Instead, the examples use the Eventuate Tram frameworks, which have a simple,
easy-to-understand API that hides the implementation details. You can use these
frameworks in your applications. Alternatively, you can study the Eventuate Tram
frameworks and reimplement the concepts yourself.

---

## Page 132

102
CHAPTER 3
Interprocess communication in a microservice architecture
DOMAIN EVENT PUBLISHING
Eventuate Tram has APIs for publishing and consuming domain events. Chapter 5
explains that domain events are events that are emitted by an aggregate (business
object) when it’s created, updated, or deleted. A service publishes a domain event
using the DomainEventPublisher interface. Here is an example:
DomainEventPublisher domainEventPublisher;
String accountId = ...;
DomainEvent domainEvent = new AccountDebited(...);
domainEventPublisher.publish("Account", accountId, Collections.singletonList(
domainEvent));
A service consumes domain events using the DomainEventDispatcher. An example
follows:
DomainEventHandlers domainEventHandlers = DomainEventHandlersBuilder
.forAggregateType("Order")
.onEvent(AccountDebited.class, domainEvent -> { ... })
.build();
new DomainEventDispatcher("eventDispatcherId",
domainEventHandlers,
messageConsumer);
Events aren’t the only high-level messaging pattern supported by Eventuate Tram. It
also supports command/reply-based messaging. 
COMMAND/REPLY-BASED MESSAGING
A client can send a command message to a service using the CommandProducer inter-
face. For example
CommandProducer commandProducer = ...;
Map<String, String> extraMessageHeaders = Collections.emptyMap();
String commandId = commandProducer.send("CustomerCommandChannel",
new DoSomethingCommand(),
"ReplyToChannel",
extraMessageHeaders);
A service consumes command messages using the CommandDispatcher class. Command-
Dispatcher uses the MessageConsumer interface to subscribe to specified events. It dis-
patches each command message to the appropriate handler method. Here’s an example:
CommandHandlers commandHandlers =CommandHandlersBuilder
.fromChannel(commandChannel)
.onMessage(DoSomethingCommand.class, (command) -
> { ... ; return withSuccess(); })
.build();

---

## Page 133

103
Using asynchronous messaging to improve availability
CommandDispatcher dispatcher = new CommandDispatcher("subscribeId", 
commandHandlers, messageConsumer, messageProducer);
Throughout this book, you’ll see code examples that use these APIs for sending and
receiving messages.
 As you’ve seen, the Eventuate Tram framework implements transactional messag-
ing for Java applications. It provides a low-level API for sending and receiving messages
transactionally. It also provides the higher-level APIs for publishing and consuming
domain events and for sending and processing commands.
 Let’s now look at a service design approach that uses asynchronous messaging to
improve availability. 
3.4
Using asynchronous messaging to improve availability
As you’ve seen, a variety of IPC mechanisms have different trade-offs. One particular
trade-off is how your choice of IPC mechanism impacts availability. In this section,
you’ll learn that synchronous communication with other services as part of request
handling reduces application availability. As a result, you should design your services
to use asynchronous messaging whenever possible.
 Let’s first look at the problem with synchronous communication and how it
impacts availability.
3.4.1
Synchronous communication reduces availability
REST is an extremely popular IPC mechanism. You may be tempted to use it for inter-
service communication. The problem with REST, though, is that it’s a synchronous
protocol: an HTTP client must wait for the service to send a response. Whenever
services communicate using a synchronous protocol, the availability of the applica-
tion is reduced.
 To see why, consider the scenario shown in figure 3.15. The Order Service has a
REST API for creating an Order. It invokes the Consumer Service and the Restaurant
Service to validate the Order. Both of those services also have REST APIs.
Client
Order
Service
Consumer
Service
Restaurant
Service
POST/orders
GET/consumers/id
GET/restaurant/id
Figure 3.15
The Order Service invokes other services using REST. It’s straightforward, but it 
requires all the services to be simultaneously available, which reduces the availability of the API.

---

## Page 134

104
CHAPTER 3
Interprocess communication in a microservice architecture
The sequence of steps for creating an order is as follows:
1
Client makes an HTTP POST /orders request to the Order Service.
2
Order Service retrieves consumer information by making an HTTP GET
/consumers/id request to the Consumer Service.
3
Order Service retrieves restaurant information by making an HTTP GET
/restaurant/id request to the Restaurant Service.
4
Order Taking validates the request using the consumer and restaurant infor-
mation.
5
Order Taking creates an Order.
6
Order Taking sends an HTTP response to the client.
Because these services use HTTP, they must all be simultaneously available in order
for the FTGO application to process the CreateOrder request. The FTGO application
couldn’t create orders if any one of these three services is down. Mathematically
speaking, the availability of a system operation is the product of the availability of the
services that are invoked by that operation. If the Order Service and the two services
that it invokes are 99.5% available, the overall availability is 99.5%3 = 98.5%, which is
significantly less. Each additional service that participates in handling a request fur-
ther reduces availability.
 This problem isn’t specific to REST-based communication. Availability is reduced
whenever a service can only respond to its client after receiving a response from
another service. This problem exists even if services communicate using request/
response style interaction over asynchronous messaging. For example, the availability
of the Order Service would be reduced if it sent a message to the Consumer Service
via a message broker and then waited for a response.
 If you want to maximize availability, you must minimize the amount of synchro-
nous communication. Let’s look at how to do that. 
3.4.2
Eliminating synchronous interaction
There are a few different ways to reduce the amount of synchronous communication
with other services while handling synchronous requests. One solution is to avoid the
problem entirely by defining services that only have asynchronous APIs. That’s not
always possible, though. For example, public APIs are commonly RESTful. Services
are therefore sometimes required to have synchronous APIs.
 Fortunately, there are ways to handle synchronous requests without making syn-
chronous requests. Let’s talk about the options.
USE ASYNCHRONOUS INTERACTION STYLES
Ideally, all interactions should be done using the asynchronous interaction styles
described earlier in this chapter. For example, say a client of the FTGO application
used an asynchronous request/asynchronous response style of interaction to create
orders. A client creates an order by sending a request message to the Order Service.

---

## Page 135

105
Using asynchronous messaging to improve availability
This service then asynchronously exchanges messages with other services and eventu-
ally sends a reply message to the client. Figure 3.16 shows the design.
The client and the services communicate asynchronously by sending messages via
messaging channels. No participant in this interaction is ever blocked waiting for a
response.
 Such an architecture would be extremely resilient, because the message broker
buffers messages until they can be consumed. The problem, however, is that services
often have an external API that uses a synchronous protocol such as REST, so it must
respond to requests immediately.
 If a service has a synchronous API, one way to improve availability is to replicate
data. Let’s see how that works. 
REPLICATE DATA
One way to minimize synchronous requests during request processing is to replicate
data. A service maintains a replica of the data that it needs when processing requests.
It keeps the replica up-to-date by subscribing to events published by the services that
own the data. For example, Order Service could maintain a replica of data owned by
Consumer Service and Restaurant Service. This would enable Order Service to
handle a request to create an order without having to interact with those services.
Figure 3.17 shows the design.
 Consumer Service and Restaurant Service publish events whenever their data
changes. Order Service subscribes to those events and updates its replica.
 In some situations, replicating data is a useful approach. For example, chapter 5
describes how Order Service replicates data from Restaurant Service so that it can
validate and price menu items. One drawback of replication is that it can sometimes
require the replication of large amounts of data, which is inefficient. For example, it
may not be practical for Order Service to maintain a replica of the data owned by
Consumer Service, due to the large number of consumers. Another drawback of
Client
Consumer
Service
Restaurant
Service
Order request
channel
Consumer request
channel
Order Service
reply channel
Restaurant request
channel
Create order
request
Create order
response
Order
Service
Client reply
channel
Figure 3.16
The FTGO application has higher availability if its services communicate using asynchronous 
messaging instead of synchronous calls.

---

## Page 136

106
CHAPTER 3
Interprocess communication in a microservice architecture
replication is that it doesn’t solve the problem of how a service updates data owned by
other services.
 One way to solve that problem is for a service to delay interacting with other ser-
vices until after it responds to its client. We’ll next look at how that works.
FINISH PROCESSING AFTER RETURNING A RESPONSE
Another way to eliminate synchronous communication during request processing is
for a service to handle a request as follows:
1
Validate the request using only the data available locally.
2
Update its database, including inserting messages into the OUTBOX table.
3
Return a response to its client.
While handling a request, the service doesn’t synchronously interact with any other
services. Instead, it asynchronously sends messages to other services. This approach
ensures that the services are loosely coupled. As you’ll learn in the next chapter, this is
often implemented using a saga.
 For example, if Order Service uses this approach, it creates an order in a PENDING
state and then validates the order asynchronously by exchanging messages with other
services. Figure 3.18 shows what happens when the createOrder() operation is
invoked. The sequence of events is as follows:
1
Order Service creates an Order in a PENDING state.
2
Order Service returns a response to its client containing the order ID.
3
Order Service sends a ValidateConsumerInfo message to Consumer Service.
Services publish events
when their data changes.
Replicated data enables Order Service to
handle the createOrder() request without
synchronously invoking services.
Restaurant
Service
Consumer event
channel
Restaurant event
channel
Order
Service
Consumer
Service
Consumer Service database
«table»
CONSUMERS
createOrder()
Restaurant Service database
«table»
RESTAURANTS
Order Service database
«table»
ORDERS
«table»
CONSUMERS
«table»
RESTAURANTS
Figure 3.17
Order Service is self-contained because it has replicas of the consumer and restaurant data.

---

## Page 137

107
Using asynchronous messaging to improve availability
4
Order Service sends a ValidateOrderDetails message to Restaurant Service.
5
Consumer Service receives a ValidateConsumerInfo message, verifies the con-
sumer can place an order, and sends a ConsumerValidated message to Order
Service.
6
Restaurant Service receives a ValidateOrderDetails message, verifies the
menu item are valid and that the restaurant can deliver to the order’s delivery
address, and sends an OrderDetailsValidated message to Order Service.
7
Order Service receives ConsumerValidated and OrderDetailsValidated and
changes the state of the order to VALIDATED.
8
…
Order Service can receive the ConsumerValidated and OrderDetailsValidated mes-
sages in either order. It keeps track of which message it receives first by changing the
state of the order. If it receives the ConsumerValidated first, it changes the state of the
order to CONSUMER_VALIDATED, whereas if it receives the OrderDetailsValidated mes-
sage first, it changes its state to ORDER_DETAILS_VALIDATED. Order Service changes
the state of the Order to VALIDATED when it receives the other message.
Synchronous
Key
Asynchronous
Order Service
Client
Consumer Service
Restaurant Service
...
createOrder
Asynchronous
Synchronous
create order
update order
update order
createOrder
ValidateConsumerInfo
ValidateOrderDetails
ConsumerValidated
OrderDetailsValidated
...
Figure 3.18
Order Service creates an order without invoking any other service. It then asynchronously 
validates the newly created Order by exchanging messages with other services, including Consumer Service 
and Restaurant Service.

---

## Page 138

108
CHAPTER 3
Interprocess communication in a microservice architecture
 After the Order has been validated, Order Service completes the rest of the order-
creation process, discussed in the next chapter. What’s nice about this approach is
that even if Consumer Service is down, for example, Order Service still creates orders
and responds to its clients. Eventually, Consumer Service will come back up and pro-
cess any queued messages, and orders will be validated.
 A drawback of a service responding before fully processing a request is that it
makes the client more complex. For example, Order Service makes minimal guaran-
tees about the state of a newly created order when it returns a response. It creates the
order and returns immediately before validating the order and authorizing the con-
sumer’s credit card. Consequently, in order for the client to know whether the order
was successfully created, either it must periodically poll or Order Service must send it
a notification message. As complex as it sounds, in many situations this is the pre-
ferred approach—especially because it also addresses the distributed transaction man-
agement issues I discuss in the next chapter. In chapters 4 and 5, for example, I
describe how Order Service uses this approach. 
Summary
The microservice architecture is a distributed architecture, so interprocess
communication plays a key role.
It’s essential to carefully manage the evolution of a service’s API. Backward-
compatible changes are the easiest to make because they don’t impact clients. If
you make a breaking change to a service’s API, it will typically need to support
both the old and new versions until its clients have been upgraded.
There are numerous IPC technologies, each with different trade-offs. One key
design decision is to choose either a synchronous remote procedure invocation
pattern or the asynchronous Messaging pattern. Synchronous remote proce-
dure invocation-based protocols, such as REST, are the easiest to use. But ser-
vices should ideally communicate using asynchronous messaging in order to
increase availability.
In order to prevent failures from cascading through a system, a service client
that uses a synchronous protocol must be designed to handle partial failures,
which are when the invoked service is either down or exhibiting high latency. In
particular, it must use timeouts when making requests, limit the number of out-
standing requests, and use the Circuit breaker pattern to avoid making calls to a
failing service.
An architecture that uses synchronous protocols must include a service discov-
ery mechanism in order for clients to determine the network location of a ser-
vice instance. The simplest approach is to use the service discovery mechanism
implemented by the deployment platform: the Server-side discovery and 3rd
party registration patterns. But an alternative approach is to implement service
discovery at the application level: the Client-side discovery and Self registration

---

## Page 139

109
Summary
patterns. It’s more work, but it does handle the scenario where services are run-
ning on multiple deployment platforms.
A good way to design a messaging-based architecture is to use the messages and
channels model, which abstracts the details of the underlying messaging system.
You can then map that design to a specific messaging infrastructure, which is
typically message broker–based.
One key challenge when using messaging is atomically updating the database
and publishing a message. A good solution is to use the Transactional outbox
pattern and first write the message to the database as part of the database trans-
action. A separate process then retrieves the message from the database using
either the Polling publisher pattern or the Transaction log tailing pattern and
publishes it to the message broker.

---

## Page 140

110
Managing transactions
with sagas
When Mary started investigating the microservice architecture, one of her biggest
concerns was how to implement transactions that span multiple services. Transac-
tions are an essential ingredient of every enterprise application. Without transac-
tions it would be impossible to maintain data consistency.
 ACID (Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, Durability) transactions greatly simplify
the job of the developer by providing the illusion that each transaction has exclu-
sive access to the data. In a microservice architecture, transactions that are within a
single service can still use ACID transactions. The challenge, however, lies in imple-
menting transactions for operations that update data owned by multiple services.
This chapter covers
Why distributed transactions aren’t a good fit for 
modern applications
Using the Saga pattern to maintain data 
consistency in a microservice architecture
Coordinating sagas using choreography and 
orchestration
Using countermeasures to deal with the lack of 
isolation

---

## Page 141

111
Transaction management in a microservice architecture
For example, as described in chapter 2, the createOrder() operation spans numer-
ous services, including Order Service, Kitchen Service, and Accounting Service.
Operations such as these need a transaction management mechanism that works
across services.
 Mary discovered that, as mentioned in chapter 2, the traditional approach to dis-
tributed transaction management isn’t a good choice for modern applications.
Instead of an ACID transactions, an operation that spans services must use what’s
known as a saga, a message-driven sequence of local transactions, to maintain data
consistency. One challenge with sagas is that they are ACD (Atomicity, Consistency,
Durability). They lack the isolation feature of traditional ACID transactions. As a
result, an application must use what are known as countermeasures, design techniques
that prevent or reduce the impact of concurrency anomalies caused by the lack of
isolation.
 In many ways, the biggest obstacle that Mary and the FTGO developers will face
when adopting microservices is moving from a single database with ACID transactions
to a multi-database architecture with ACD sagas. They’re used to the simplicity of the
ACID transaction model. But in reality, even monolithic applications such as the FTGO
application typically don’t use textbook ACID transactions. For example, many appli-
cations use a lower transaction isolation level in order to improve performance. Also,
many important business processes, such as transferring money between accounts at
different banks, are eventually consistent. Not even Starbucks uses two-phase commit
(www.enterpriseintegrationpatterns.com/ramblings/18_starbucks.html).
 I begin this chapter by looking at the challenges of transaction management in the
microservice architecture and explain why the traditional approach to distributed
transaction management isn’t an option. Next I explain how to maintain data consis-
tency using sagas. After that I look at the two different ways of coordinating sagas:
choreography, where participants exchange events without a centralized point of con-
trol, and orchestration, where a centralized controller tells the saga participants what
operation to perform. I discuss how to use countermeasures to prevent or reduce the
impact of concurrency anomalies caused by the lack of isolation between sagas. Finally, I
describe the implementation of an example saga.
 Let’s start by taking a look at the challenge of managing transactions in a micro-
service architecture.
4.1
Transaction management in a microservice 
architecture
Almost every request handled by an enterprise application is executed within a data-
base transaction. Enterprise application developers use frameworks and libraries that
simplify transaction management. Some frameworks and libraries provide a program-
matic API for explicitly beginning, committing, and rolling back transactions. Other
frameworks, such as the Spring framework, provide a declarative mechanism. Spring
provides an @Transactional annotation that arranges for method invocations to be

---

## Page 142

112
CHAPTER 4
Managing transactions with sagas
automatically executed within a transaction. As a result, it’s straightforward to write
transactional business logic.
 Or, to be more precise, transaction management is straightforward in a monolithic
application that accesses a single database. Transaction management is more chal-
lenging in a complex monolithic application that uses multiple databases and mes-
sage brokers. And in a microservice architecture, transactions span multiple services,
each of which has its own database. In this situation, the application must use a more
elaborate mechanism to manage transactions. As you’ll learn, the traditional approach
of using distributed transactions isn’t a viable option for modern applications. Instead, a
microservices-based application must use sagas.
 Before I explain sagas, let’s first look at why transaction management is challeng-
ing in a microservice architecture.
4.1.1
The need for distributed transactions in a microservice 
architecture
Imagine that you’re the FTGO developer responsible for implementing the create-
Order() system operation. As described in chapter 2, this operation must verify that
the consumer can place an order, verify the order details, authorize the consumer’s
credit card, and create an Order in the database. It’s relatively straightforward to
implement this operation in the monolithic FTGO application. All the data required
to validate the order is readily accessible. What’s more, you can use an ACID transac-
tion to ensure data consistency. You might use Spring’s @Transactional annotation
on the createOrder() service method.
 In contrast, implementing the same operation in a microservice architecture is
much more complicated. As figure 4.1 shows, the needed data is scattered around
multiple services. The createOrder() operation accesses data in numerous services.
It reads data from Consumer Service and updates data in Order Service, Kitchen
Service, and Accounting Service.
 Because each service has its own database, you need to use a mechanism to main-
tain data consistency across those databases. 
4.1.2
The trouble with distributed transactions
The traditional approach to maintaining data consistency across multiple services,
databases, or message brokers is to use distributed transactions. The de facto standard
for distributed transaction management is the X/Open Distributed Transaction Pro-
cessing (DTP) Model (X/Open XA—see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/X/Open_XA).
XA uses two-phase commit (2PC) to ensure that all participants in a transaction either
commit or rollback. An XA-compliant technology stack consists of XA-compliant data-
bases and message brokers, database drivers, and messaging APIs, and an interprocess
communication mechanism that propagates the XA global transaction ID. Most SQL
databases are XA compliant, as are some message brokers. Java EE applications can,
for example, use JTA to perform distributed transactions.

---

## Page 143

113
Transaction management in a microservice architecture
As simple as this sounds, there are a variety of problems with distributed transac-
tions. One problem is that many modern technologies, including NoSQL databases
such as MongoDB and Cassandra, don’t support them. Also, distributed transactions
aren’t supported by modern message brokers such as RabbitMQ and Apache Kafka.
As a result, if you insist on using distributed transactions, you can’t use many mod-
ern technologies.
 Another problem with distributed transactions is that they are a form of synchro-
nous IPC, which reduces availability. In order for a distributed transaction to commit,
all the participating services must be available. As described in chapter 3, the availabil-
ity is the product of the availability of all of the participants in the transaction. If a dis-
tributed transaction involves two services that are 99.5% available, then the overall
availability is 99%, which is significantly less. Each additional service involved in a dis-
tributed transaction further reduces availability. There is even Eric Brewer’s CAP theo-
rem, which states that a system can only have two of the following three properties:
Account
Ticket
Consumer
Data consistency required
Writes
Writes
createOrder()
Reads
Accounting Service
Kitchen Service
Order
Order Service
Consumer Service
The createOrder() operation reads from
Consumer Service and updates data
in Order Service, Kitchen Service,
and Accounting Service.
Order
controller
Figure 4.1
The createOrder() operation updates data in several services. It must use a 
mechanism to maintain data consistency across those services.

---

## Page 144

114
CHAPTER 4
Managing transactions with sagas
consistency, availability, and partition tolerance (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CAP
_theorem). Today, architects prefer to have a system that’s available rather than one
that’s consistent.
 On the surface, distributed transactions are appealing. From a developer’s per-
spective, they have the same programming model as local transactions. But because of
the problems mentioned so far, distributed transactions aren’t a viable technology for
modern applications. Chapter 3 described how to send messages as part of a database
transaction without using distributed transactions. To solve the more complex prob-
lem of maintaining data consistency in a microservice architecture, an application
must use a different mechanism that builds on the concept of loosely coupled, asyn-
chronous services. This is where sagas come in. 
4.1.3
Using the Saga pattern to maintain data consistency
Sagas are mechanisms to maintain data consistency in a microservice architecture
without having to use distributed transactions. You define a saga for each system com-
mand that needs to update data in multiple services. A saga is a sequence of local
transactions. Each local transaction updates data within a single service using the
familiar ACID transaction frameworks and libraries mentioned earlier.
The system operation initiates the first step of the saga. The completion of a local
transaction triggers the execution of the next local transaction. Later, in section 4.2,
you’ll see how coordination of the steps is implemented using asynchronous messag-
ing. An important benefit of asynchronous messaging is that it ensures that all the
steps of a saga are executed, even if one or more of the saga’s participants is temporar-
ily unavailable.
 Sagas differ from ACID transactions in a couple of important ways. As I describe in
detail in section 4.3, they lack the isolation property of ACID transactions. Also, because
each local transaction commits its changes, a saga must be rolled back using compensat-
ing transactions. I talk more about compensating transactions later in this section. Let’s
take a look at an example saga.
AN EXAMPLE SAGA: THE CREATE ORDER SAGA
The example saga used throughout this chapter is the Create Order Saga, which is
shown in figure 4.2. The Order Service implements the createOrder() operation
using this saga. The saga’s first local transaction is initiated by the external request to
create an order. The other five local transactions are each triggered by completion of
the previous one.
Pattern: Saga
Maintain data consistency across services using a sequence of local transactions
that are coordinated using asynchronous messaging. See http://microservices.io/
patterns/data/saga.html.

---

## Page 145

115
Transaction management in a microservice architecture
This saga consists of the following local transactions:
1
Order Service—Create an Order in an APPROVAL_PENDING state.
2
Consumer Service—Verify that the consumer can place an order.
3
Kitchen Service—Validate order details and create a Ticket in the CREATE
_PENDING.
4
Accounting Service—Authorize consumer’s credit card.
5
Kitchen Service—Change the state of the Ticket to AWAITING_ACCEPTANCE.
6
Order Service—Change the state of the Order to APPROVED.
Later, in section 4.2, I describe how the services that participate in a saga communi-
cate using asynchronous messaging. A service publishes a message when a local trans-
action completes. This message then triggers the next step in the saga. Not only does
using messaging ensure the saga participants are loosely coupled, it also guarantees
that a saga completes. That’s because if the recipient of a message is temporarily
unavailable, the message broker buffers the message until it can be delivered.
 On the surface, sagas seem straightforward, but there are a few challenges to using
them. One challenge is the lack of isolation between sagas. Section 4.3 describes how
to handle this problem. Another challenge is rolling back changes when an error
occurs. Let’s take a look at how to do that. 
SAGAS USE COMPENSATING TRANSACTIONS TO ROLL BACK CHANGES
A great feature of traditional ACID transactions is that the business logic can easily
roll back a transaction if it detects the violation of a business rule. It executes a ROLL-
BACK statement, and the database undoes all the changes made so far. Unfortunately,
sagas can’t be automatically rolled back, because each step commits its changes to the
local database. This means, for example, that if the authorization of the credit card
fails in the fourth step of the Create Order Saga, the FTGO application must explicitly
Order Service
Saga
Create order
Txn:1
Approve order
Txn:6
Consumer Service
Create order
Txn:1
Verify consumer
Txn:2
Kitchen Service
Create ticket
Txn:3
Approve ticket
Txn:5
Accounting Service
Authorize card
Txn:4
Figure 4.2
Creating an Order using a saga. The createOrder() operation is implemented by a 
saga that consists of local transactions in several services.

---
