# 5. Practical.Event-Driven.Microservices.Architecture.Hugo.Filipe.Oliveira.Rocha.Apress.9781484274675.EBooksWorld.ir

> Extracted from: `5. Practical.Event-Driven.Microservices.Architecture.Hugo.Filipe.Oliveira.Rocha.Apress.9781484274675.EBooksWorld.ir.pdf` (pages 85-115)
> Total pages in PDF: 457

---

## Page 85

70
by handling the message. The monolith itself has only limited benefits to having a 
queue but would set the new system’s pace. It would also be a good trial to see if the 
functionality can deal with the weaker consistency guarantees the queue introduces.
2.6  Incremental Migration from a Monolith to an  
Event-­Driven Architecture: Managing Dependencies
In the last few sections, we detailed how to migrate data to new services using an event-­
driven approach. This section will discuss approaches when a new service might still 
need data from the old architecture and when the monolith has the same need for the 
new services.
We might find some use cases in the monolith relatively decoupled from the rest of 
the functionalities due to not needing many dependencies to work with. The example of 
the reporting module, although it needs order management information, is not a central 
functionality that is referenced everywhere. As mentioned in Section 2.2, we should 
use these modules to start the migration; it’s often better to start with a small, easy part 
and build our way on top of that than trying to migrate a central functionality that is 
referenced throughout all modules. However, we will reach the point where we might 
migrate a functionality but still need data from an unrelated module inside the monolith. 
More than reacting to its changes, it requires the module’s data to process its logic. Since 
the data is in the monolith, we need strategies to access that data in the service. The 
inverse can also be applied; other modules in the monolith might still need data that we 
migrated to a new service.
2.6.1  Managing a Dependency from a New Event-Driven 
Service to a Legacy Monolith
Using the same example in Figure 2-2, let’s now look at the inventory module. The 
inventory module might need product information to process stock changes; every 
time someone changes the stock, the inventory module fetches product information 
and associates that stock change to the product. This use case differs from the reporting 
module since it is not reacting to the system’s changes; the inventory module fetches 
information in the flow of its domain.
Chapter 2  Moving from a Monolith to an Event-Driven Architecture

---

## Page 86

71
The order management calls the inventory module to remove the stock quantity the 
user bought. Instead of calling the inventory module directly, the order management 
module would publish an event signaling the user created an order. The new inventory 
service would react to that event but would still need the product management module 
information. The first most direct approach would be to request that information from 
the monolith, as illustrated in Figure 2-10.
This alternative is very intuitive: we treat the dependency in the inventory service 
as we would call any other module inside the monolith, but instead of being inside 
the same application, it now makes a remote request. We often are reluctant to add 
functionality to the monolith, and we should be; however, adding functionality to the 
monolith might be a stepping stone to build the new architecture.
2UGHU
0DQDJHPHQW
6XEVFULSWLRQV
DQG
1RWLILFDWLRQV
3URGXFW
0DQDJHPHQW
5HSRUWLQJ
6KLSSLQJ
$3,
'%
'%
0HVVDJH
4XHXH
,QYHQWRU\
6HUYLFH
7RIHWFKDGGLWLRQDO
LQIRUPDWLRQWKHLQYHQWRU\
VHUYLFHUHTXHVWV
LQIRUPDWLRQGLUHFWO\IURP
WKHPRQROLWK
Figure 2-10.  When the inventory service needs additional information that still 
exists on the monolith, it requests the information directly through an API
Chapter 2  Moving from a Monolith to an Event-Driven Architecture

---

## Page 87

72
However, the inventory service now has a direct dependency on the monolith. If 
the monolith struggles with performance issues or has a catastrophic failure (like a 
memory leak), it will cascade to the inventory service. Scaling the inventory service will 
also impact the monolith; if we add more resources to the service, it will trigger more 
requests to the monolith. These issues were the very thing we were trying to avoid with 
the decoupled nature of event-driven architectures. It is a viable choice, and we might 
use it sparingly to promote the migration of functionalities that need this approach. 
However, it must be temporary and something we should use only sparingly.
An alternative to this option is to publish the product data and use an internal 
view of that data inside the inventory service. This way, the inventory service remains 
decoupled, and we avoid the remote request to the monolith, illustrated in Figure 2-11.
2UGHU
0DQDJHPHQW
6XEVFULSWLRQV
DQG
1RWLILFDWLRQV
3URGXFW
0DQDJHPHQW
5HSRUWLQJ
6KLSSLQJ
'%
'%
0HVVDJH
4XHXH
,QYHQWRU\
6HUYLFH
0HVVDJH
4XHXH
,QWHUQDOYLHZRIWKH
SURGXFWGDWD
,QVWHDGRIDUHPRWHUHTXHVW
LQYHQWRU\VHUYLFHKDQGOHV
SURGXFWHYHQWVDQGVWRUHVDQ
LQWHUQDOYLHZRIWKHSURGXFW
GDWD
Figure 2-11.  Instead of a direct remote request to the monolith, we are able to 
avoid a direct dependency through an internal view of the product data inside the 
inventory service
Chapter 2  Moving from a Monolith to an Event-Driven Architecture

---

## Page 88

73
The inventory service, by having an internal view of the product data, would be able 
to process its domain logic by using that internal state instead of requesting data to the 
monolith. The state doesn’t necessarily need to be saved inside the database; Kafka, 
for example (we will discuss Kafka in more detail in Chapters 3 and 6), if we use Kafka 
Streams, provides a way to keep that information in KTables. It is also possible to opt for 
other solutions to save data, discussed in Chapter 8.
We are preferring to denormalize the data in the service over having a centralized 
place to hold it. Besides the higher decoupling, this solution provides a performance 
boost since accessing local data is often faster than making a remote external request. 
But it also has an infrastructure and maintenance overhead of saving and maintaining 
that data.
2.6.2  Managing a Dependency from a Legacy Application 
to a New Event-Driven Service
As we discussed, by migrating modules from the monolith, we also move the data 
associated with those modules. There might be use cases where other modules 
inside the monolith require that data. A common example is UIs that display diverse 
information and often aggregate data from several domains.
Using the same example we used before, let’s say the order management module 
needed to validate if the product being ordered had enough stock to fulfill the order 
when receiving a new order. To do the validation, the module would have to fetch the 
current stock information. If we move the inventory service to an independent service, 
the data no longer exists in the monolith.
We could follow the same approaches we discussed before. The most intuitive 
approach would be to request information from the new service, as illustrated in 
Figure 2-12. When the order management module needs the stock information, it would 
request data from the inventory service much like it would do if the module was still 
inside the monolith, but instead of running the request in memory, it makes a remote 
request.
Chapter 2  Moving from a Monolith to an Event-Driven Architecture

---

## Page 89

74
Although this approach suffers from the same issues we mentioned before, they 
aren’t as troublesome. We might still have a cascading failure if the inventory service 
fails, but it is less likely to happen since the service has a minimal scope. On the other 
hand, any change in any bounded context of the monolith has the potential to bring 
the whole application down. If we need to add load to the monolith, it will trigger more 
requests, but the inventory service is easily scalable; scaling a monolith is harder. Since 
this approach is straightforward and easy to implement, we might use it as a building 
block, and when we move the order management module, opt for a different strategy.
We could also adopt a strategy to feed the monolith’s existing state with the inventory 
service’s events. This way has the advantage of keeping both architectures decoupled, as 
illustrated in Figure 2-13.
2UGHU
0DQDJHPHQW
6XEVFULSWLRQV
DQG
1RWLILFDWLRQV
3URGXFW
0DQDJHPHQW
5HSRUWLQJ
6KLSSLQJ
'%
'%
,QYHQWRU\
6HUYLFH
7RIHWFKWKHFXUUHQWVWRFN
TXDQWLW\WKHPRQROLWKGRHV
DUHPRWHUHTXHVWWRWKH
LQYHQWRU\VHUYLFH
$3,
Figure 2-12.  The monolith requests information from the inventory service 
through a remote request
Chapter 2  Moving from a Monolith to an Event-Driven Architecture

---

## Page 90

75
Often monoliths have internal views that join a large amount of diverse information 
together. Joining information is possible since all data is stored in the same database; 
when deconstructing the database, maintaining this kind of functionality is challenging. 
A sustainable approach is to sync the information back to the monolith and feed its 
internal state through the new services’ events. The new services are the source of truth, 
making the monolithic database a denormalized view of the different domains. This 
approach is often required since joining diverse information through HTTP requests 
isn’t possible without requesting a lot of information and joining it in memory, a 
cumbersome process both performance and resource-wise.
2UGHU
0DQDJHPHQW
6XEVFULSWLRQV
DQG
1RWLILFDWLRQV
3URGXFW
0DQDJHPHQW
5HSRUWLQJ
6KLSSLQJ
'%
'%
,QYHQWRU\
6HUYLFH
0HVVDJH
4XHXH
7KHPRQROLWKKDQGOHV
WKHHYHQWVIURP
LQYHQWRU\VHUYLFHDQG
NHHSVLWVVWDWHV\QFHG
Figure 2-13.  Monolith handles the events and keeps its internal view of the 
inventory data synced
Chapter 2  Moving from a Monolith to an Event-Driven Architecture

---

## Page 91

76
2.7  Gradually Moving Traffic to New Microservices
In the last sections, we discussed how we could move functionality from a monolith to 
individual services. However, we didn’t detail how to shift traffic from the monolith to 
the new services. This section will detail how we can gradually move that traffic without 
a big bang release.
Previously, we discussed that we could shift traffic to the new service once the 
new service is fully functional and descope the old functionality. However, we should 
guarantee the transition has the necessary quality guarantees. Whenever possible, we 
should avoid big bang releases; it is much safer to gradually deliver functionally than 
releasing it all at once, in a single moment.
The event-driven approaches we discussed in the previous sections allow us to 
build the new services gradually without impacting the current application. Exposing 
the data on the event queue also enables the service to asynchronous bootstrap its 
database. Since the message queue decouples the service and enables it to process the 
information asynchronously, as that process advances, it provides a way to compare the 
information in both databases to guarantee the data is coherent. Event-driven queues 
also retain the messages even after consumption; if we detect an issue that corrupted the 
data, we can simply read the queue from the beginning and regenerate the state. Once 
we are confident the data is coherent, we can start to shift requests to the new service, as 
illustrated in Figure 2-14.
Chapter 2  Moving from a Monolith to an Event-Driven Architecture

---

## Page 92

77
,QYHQWRU\
0DQDJHPHQW
2UGHU
0DQDJHPHQW
6XEVFULSWLRQV
DQG
1RWLILFDWLRQV
3URGXFW
0DQDJHPHQW
5HSRUWLQJ
6KLSSLQJ
'%
5HSRUWLQJ
6HUYLFH
'%
2WKHUURXWHV
0HVVDJH
4XHXH
:HFDQUXQDQDGKRF
SURFHVVWKDWFRPSDUHV
WKHLQIRUPDWLRQEHWZHHQ
WKHGDWDEDVHV
*(7UHSRUWV86
3UR[\
DOORUDVXEVHWRI
UHTXHVWVWRWKHQHZ
VHUYLFH
8VHU
8SVWUHDPDSSOLFDWLRQV
$SUR[\FDQUHGLUHFW
Figure 2-14.  The proxy between the upstream applications and the downstream 
services can route the monolith or new service requests
Chapter 2  Moving from a Monolith to an Event-Driven Architecture

---

## Page 93

78
We also don’t need to route all requests at once; we can route based on the content; 
the proxy can filter a subset of requests to the new service and the remaining ones to 
the existing application, guaranteeing a gradual rollout. For example, as illustrated in 
Figure 2-14, the proxy can forward part of the requests based on the route. If we consult 
reports by country, we could forward requests for a country to the new service and keep 
the remaining in the existing application.
If it is impossible to set up a proxy between the upstream systems, we can use the 
monolith to serve as a proxy and forward the requests to the new service. We can change 
it to receive the request and internally call or send a message to the new service. It’s not 
ideal since we will still be using the application we want to discontinue, but might help 
as a temporary solution. At the same time, the monolith’s consumers can adapt to the 
new services.
We can also apply content routing to messages. If the monolith is already receiving 
messages, like the approach in Section 2.5, we can forward a subset of messages to the 
new service and the remaining to the existing application. For example, messages with 
country code “US” would be consumed by the new service and ignore the others, while 
the monolith would do the inverse. We could also use different queues, one for the new 
service and another for the monolith, although we would have to duplicate the messages 
for both queues. This way is also possible to gradually shift message traffic between the 
two applications.
It is also important to maintain a rollback strategy in case things go wrong. Event-­
driven queues retain the messages in the queue. If we build systems that rely on those 
queues to process their domain logic, it’s often straightforward to roll back the system 
and reprocess the messages after the point the issue was introduced. Chapter 7 further 
details this rollback strategy.
Chapter 2  Moving from a Monolith to an Event-Driven Architecture

---

## Page 94

79
2.8  Migrating from a Monolith: Two-Way 
Synchronization and Living with Two Sources 
of Truth
In Section 2.6, we discussed how to feed the monolith’s state after migrating the source 
of truth to the new services. In the previous sections, we discussed how to migrate 
the monolith’s functionality and data to the new architecture. However, we discussed 
use cases where the transition is immediate or spans during a short period. There are 
situations where this transition isn’t as immediate, and we might need to maintain 
both the old and new architecture for a considerable amount of time. We should always 
avoid two sources of truth; it’s complicated and hard to maintain; however, in the real 
world, often migrating functionality is messier than simply descoping old functionality 
instantaneously.
In any migration to an event-driven microservice, our key goal is to turn the new 
service into the source of truth; the entry point of that domain’s information is the new 
service. A single source of truth is a fundamental objective we always must aim for in 
any situation. However, there are times we must maintain functionalities in the old 
application that can’t or are too hard to migrate to in a short period. Functionalities 
that span several domains can be hard to discontinue since each domain often belongs 
to different teams. Some teams may need to advance in the migration at a different 
time than the others. As mentioned in Section 2.7, we should always do this migration 
gradually, so even if the timing was right, synchronizing a release between several teams 
is more often than not a recipe for disaster. Section 2.6 mentions strategies to keep the 
monolith’s state synchronized, but how does that play out when we mix strategies like 
those mentioned in Sections 2.3 and 2.6? We could descope the monolith’s functionality 
and feed the state back to the monolith in a single moment, but this is risky and such 
short time migrations are rare.
When we discussed CDC in Section 2.4, we described it as an interesting approach 
because there might be functionalities entangled throughout the whole application. 
When the monolith’s domain we are trying to split has logic spread across the entire 
application and in stored procedures, it can be exceptionally hard to decouple it from the 
rest of the application. Several entry points are often dependent on other domain logic 
or on consumers that can’t change to the new service quickly. In the company where we 
were trying to migrate the inventory management logic I mentioned in Section 2.4, we 
used CDC and it was going well; with CDC, we were able to capture every change and 
Chapter 2  Moving from a Monolith to an Event-Driven Architecture

---

## Page 95

80
synchronize it to the new service. However, that also meant the entry points were still in 
legacy. Although we were able to change many of the clients to access the service directly 
or proxy the monolith’s call to the new service, some of them were unfeasible due to the 
associated coupling and complexity. There were stored procedures that changed stock 
that joined a large amount of information from different domains like order and product. 
These were also business-critical functionalities; descoping or making them unavailable 
for a period of time wasn’t acceptable. We were able to descope them later on and move 
them to the new applications but only after most of the other domains left the monolith, 
which took years to do so; meanwhile, we had to live with two entry points and two 
sources of truth.
Doing so allowed the stock information to be available in the new architecture, 
enabling the building of new services and applications on top of that information instead 
of legacy applications. This while still maintaining some of the monolith’s functionalities 
that we couldn’t move.
Using the same example in Figure 2-2, let’s say the user could edit the reports 
generated by the reporting service. The user can edit reports in the new service, but 
editions can also be done in the monolith due to functionality we couldn’t move. 
Combining the approaches we discussed until now, we could publish changes from both 
the monolith and the reporting service to a message queue and both would listen from 
those queues, but only the changes that weren’t from that system would be consumed.
Chapter 2  Moving from a Monolith to an Event-Driven Architecture

---

## Page 96

81
,QYHQWRU\
0DQDJHPHQW
2UGHU
0DQDJHPHQW
6XEVFULSWLRQV
DQG
1RWLILFDWLRQV
3URGXFW
0DQDJHPHQW
5HSRUWLQJ
6KLSSLQJ
'%
5HSRUWLQJ
6HUYLFH
'%
DSSOLFDWLRQV
0HVVDJH
4XHXH
0HVVDJH
4XHXH
5HSRUWVHGLWHGWKURXJKWKHPRQROLWK
,QIRUPDWLRQIURPWKHPRQROLWKLV
V\QFKURQL]HGWRWKHUHSRUWLQJVHUYLFHEXW
RQO\LQIRUPDWLRQWKDWFDPHGLUHFWO\IURPWKH
UHSRUWLQJVHUYLFHLVV\QFKURQL]HGEDFNWR
WKHPRQROLWK
2QO\FKDQJHVZLWKD
&KDQJHV
6LQJOHG
ZLWKWKH
RULJLQ
GLIIHUHQWRULJLQDUH
V\QFKURQL]HG
2QO\FKDQJHV
ZLWKDGLIIHUHQW
RULJLQDUH
V\QFKURQL]HG
8VHUXSVWUHDP
5HSRUWVHGLWHGWKURXJKWKHQHZVHUYLFH
Figure 2-15.  A way to maintain both systems synchronized. Both systems 
publish changes, and both systems process them but ignore the changes that were 
originated by themselves
One of the catches in this solution is breaking the cycle; we can do that, for example, 
with a header signaling the origin system. In Figure 2-15, if a user edits a report in the 
monolith, the monolith would publish the corresponding event to the message queue. 
The event would also need to inform the origin system of that change. The reporting 
service would consume that change and publish a similar event signaling the same 
change to its queue. The monolith is consuming that queue but ignores the change 
because it originated in the monolith. Changes in the reporting service have the same 
flow and are published to the service’s queue, consumed by the monolith, published 
again by the monolith, and ignored at the service.
Chapter 2  Moving from a Monolith to an Event-Driven Architecture

---

## Page 97

82
We aim to descope the monolith’s message queue; all new services should plug 
into the reporting service’s queue. As we descope the monolith’s functionalities, fewer 
messages should flow in the monolith’s queue. Once no messages are flowing in the 
queue means the monolith no longer has any functionality that affects the reporting 
service, and we finalized the migration. Then we should also descope the monolith’s 
queue.
There are also other details we need to consider; for example, if the user changes the 
same report at the same time in both systems, how would we manage the collision? We 
should identify events with a version or timestamp and the latest should prevail. So when 
consuming the messages, the systems would need to validate the message date and only 
update more recent changes than the system’s internal state. However, these challenges 
aren’t exclusive to two sources of truth; any horizontally scalable event-­driven system can 
encounter parallel changes due to concurrency between instances or loss of the event’s 
ordering. We will discuss approaches to these challenges in Chapters 5, 6, and 7.
Maintaining two-way synchronization, in the long run, is extremely hard and the 
source of ongoing issues. Not only are incidents harder to trace since they can originate 
from entirely different systems, but new functionalities are also limited to the monolith’s 
design choices. The domain logic also needs to stay coherent between the two systems. It 
is possible to evolve the new system without affecting the monolith due to the decoupled 
nature of the message queues, as long as the message’s contract remains the same, but 
only until a point. Most of the time, we can avoid having two sources of truth, and we 
should do the utmost possible to prevent it. It is a solution we might keep in our toolbox, 
but near the bottom, other solutions are often preferable.
2.9  Summary
•	
An event-driven architecture has a complexity boost associated with 
it, and we should question whether it is the best option for our use 
case. We should always ask ourselves what we are trying to solve and 
have a clear reason to advance with the migration.
•	
We should always strive to do an incremental migration. Doing so 
will allow us to face the challenges associated with it in a sustainable 
manner.
Chapter 2  Moving from a Monolith to an Event-Driven Architecture

---

## Page 98

83
•	
Often good candidates to be migrated first are modules with fewer 
dependencies and that largely benefit from the migration.
•	
Event-driven provides a high decoupled solution to free data from 
a monolith. It also provides the tools to build the new services 
asynchronously without impact to the monolith and the teams 
working with it.
•	
When functionalities are too coupled, too complex, or simply can’t be 
migrated seamlessly, CDC is a valid option to access the data changes 
and convert them to events.
•	
We can use events to trigger both changes in the monolith and new 
services. Doing so places the source of truth in the events further 
promoting the mindset shift to adopt events as a single source of 
truth.
•	
When other modules are depending on the data of the functionality 
we are migrating, we can use events to feed that state inside those 
applications. A view of the state can be maintained both in the 
monolith and new services and be used to solve those dependencies.
•	
Some migrations don’t need to be done fully in a single moment; we 
can gradually change traffic to the new applications.
•	
There might be use cases where a full migration can’t be done in a 
short timespan and might take several months. It is possible to use 
two-way synchronization to maintain the harder functionalities in 
the monolith while proceeding with the migration of the remaining 
ones. However, it is a complex option with several impacts; we should 
always strive for a single source of truth.
Chapter 2  Moving from a Monolith to an Event-Driven Architecture

---

## Page 99

85
© Hugo Filipe Oliveira Rocha 2022 
H. F. Oliveira Rocha, Practical Event-Driven Microservices Architecture,  
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-7468-2_3
CHAPTER 3
Defining an Event-Driven 
Microservice and Its 
Boundaries
This chapter covers:
•	
Understanding the structure of an event-driven microservice, 
associated message patterns, and common topologies
•	
Comprehend DDD (domain-driven design), how to apply it, and its 
concepts
•	
Using DDD to extract the domain’s bounded contexts and leverage 
the services’ boundaries
•	
How to avoid common pitfalls when designing the aggregate size and 
understanding its impact on downstream services
•	
What different characteristics to weight when organizing service 
boundaries
•	
Understanding the difference and the impacts of request-driven and 
event-driven services
•	
How to decide between adding functionality to an existing service or 
creating a new one

---

## Page 100

86
It’s funny how sometimes computer science feels more art than science. Perhaps 
not more, but it often has a soft brush of artistic inspiration mixed with it. We often fail 
to see the practical value in learning all the computer science fundamentals in class or 
learn about new patterns in books or articles. Usually, we use them as building blocks 
or extract their underlying ideas to combine and adapt them as solutions to unique 
problems. They often serve as an inspiration to other solutions in different contexts. 
Sometimes creativity plays a role, and your personal style gets associated with it. How 
often have we looked at someone’s code and underline the invisible traces that define a 
coworker’s style? We can feel the style the same way we would if we read several poems 
of a unique author – who is probably sitting next to you, trying to exit Vim.
When defining domains and boundaries, it can also get fuzzy and often feels more 
like art than science. There isn’t a magical formula we can apply and obtain a result, but 
there are approaches that can help us extract business domains and decide what is the 
best approach. This chapter approaches those strategies and helps us understand the 
application’s domain and translate it into a logical model.
In Chapter 2, we discussed how to extract functionality from a monolith to a 
new service. The different types of services and topologies we can build in an event-­
driven architecture are the building blocks we can use to evolve that architecture. 
Understanding them is paramount to maintaining and building these architectures.
As we evolve the architecture and depend on several different components, the need 
arises to define the services’ boundaries, how they interact with each other, and what 
domain they manage. Different organizations have different priorities; often deciding the 
adequate boundaries is a tradeoff between the different approaches. We will discuss the 
various considerations when defining boundaries in Section 3.2. DDD is an approach 
we can use to understand and extract the domain concepts. When modeling complex 
domains, the entity’s size (the aggregate in DDD terms) is often hard to measure. In an 
event-driven architecture, how we design it can have repercussions to the downstream 
consumers; this impact is detailed in Section 3.4.
Adding new functionality usually falls into one of two choices, creating a new service 
or adding functionality to existing services. Sometimes the choice isn’t clear; the high 
decoupled nature of event-driven architectures promotes the birth and decommission 
of components. However, continuously adding services further increases the system’s 
complexity. Section 3.6 further details these tradeoffs.
Chapter 3  Defining an Event-Driven Microservice and Its Boundaries

---

## Page 101

87
3.1  Building Event-Driven Microservices
This section will discuss the typical architecture of an event-driven microservice and its 
standard modules. We will discuss the typical messaging entities and messaging patterns 
that we will use in the rest of the book as building blocks in the architecture. At the end of 
this section, we will discuss common pitfalls, their impacts, and how to avoid them.
In Chapter 2, we moved functionality from a monolith to event-driven services. We 
represented it with a square, but what is inside that square? Each service is a single-­
process application, and inside it, the code is organized typically according to an 
architecture. Usually, we divide this architecture into layers. One of our missions is to 
model business concepts and processes into code. As the business grows, the application 
also grows in complexity. Organizing the application with logical layering is one way to 
manage that complexity.
Dividing an application into layers according to its responsibilities aligns with the 
separation of concerns principle. It’s also a way to help developers understand the 
application and easily find functionality. Maintaining the same architecture through 
several microservices minimizes the overhead of understanding an application and 
implementing new functionality. If someone never worked in one service and now has 
to change it, although the domain might be different, the application’s organization is 
the same, so it is easier to understand.
We can use a layered architecture to encapsulate functionality inside each layer, 
promoting the code to change without affecting other layers. The functionality can also 
be reused throughout the application standardizing common functionality in a single 
implementation. We can also use a layered architecture to limit coupling and restrict 
how layers communicate with each other. They also become useful to develop unit tests 
since the separation of concerns promotes simple single-purpose tests.
There are several types of layered architectures. Due to the natural decoupling of 
event-driven services, we don’t need to use the same in every service, as we don’t need 
to use the same technology in every service either. However, it is advisable to choose 
one and maintain the consistency between services. As we will discuss in Chapter 10, if 
other teams need to change services in the ownership of other teams, the development 
is more straightforward if every service has similar architecture. If the structure of 
applications is familiar, the focus of discussion shifts from technical details to the 
domain implementation, which is often more valuable.
Chapter 3  Defining an Event-Driven Microservice and Its Boundaries

---

## Page 102

88
3.1.1  N-Tier Architectures
The most common architectures feature a separation of the application code into several 
layers. There are several variations; the number of layers depends on the application’s 
needs (thus the name N-tier). Figure 3-1 illustrates a typical three-tier architecture.
3UHVHQWDWLRQ
$SSOLFDWLRQ	'RPDLQ
'DWD
$3,
'DWDEDVH
0HVVDJH+DQGOHUV
0HVVDJH
TXHXH
7KHSUHVHQWDWLRQOD\HU
KDQGOHVDOOUHTXHVWVDQG
FRPPXQLFDWHVRQO\ZLWK
WKHEXVLQHVVORJLFOD\HU
0HVVDJH
TXHXH
$SSOLFDWLRQV
6HUYLFHV
Figure 3-1.  Three-tier application architecture with three layers: presentation, 
application and domain, and data
Chapter 3  Defining an Event-Driven Microservice and Its Boundaries

---

## Page 103

89
In this architecture, the presentation receives all external requests; if the 
microservice has a UI, we also place it in this layer. Microservices without UI expose an 
API that other applications and services use to access the data. Typical event-driven 
microservices communicate through events. Event handlers receive the events and call 
the other layers to process their business logic. The presentation layer only interacts with 
the application and domain layer, which has all the business logic. The application and 
domain layer manages the state through the data layer, which has all the data access 
objects and the database technical implementation.
The most important part is the business logic that resides in the application and 
domain layer. One of the drawbacks of this architecture is the direct dependency of 
the application and domain layer to the data layer. Often this means the business logic 
depends on data access, which shouldn’t be relevant for the domain logic itself. The 
database implementation details often influence the implemented business logic. The 
existence of a database also often becomes a required prerequisite to the business logic. 
Testing might even become an issue due to database coupling. Often to test the business 
logic, we require a staging database; we can avoid that with dependency injection, which 
often leads to a different kind of architecture that we detail in the following.
3.1.2  Clean Architecture
An alternative to N-tier architecture is Bob Martin’s clean architecture.1 As we mention 
in the following, if we adopt the dependency inversion principle (the I in SOLID2) 
and depend upon abstractions rather than implementations, we often reach this 
architecture. It is also designed to build the domain logic in the core of the application. 
Domain logic shouldn’t depend on or reference anything else; the order management 
business logic doesn’t need to know we use SQL, for example.
Other architectures are typically designed upon the same practical concept the clean 
architecture translates. The hexagonal architecture3 (also named ports and adapters) or 
the onion architecture4 provides a similar approach based on the same principles.  
1 See Robert C. Martin, “The Clean Architecture,” August 13, 2012, https://blog.cleancoder.com/
uncle-bob/2012/08/13/the-clean-architecture.html
2 See “SOLID,” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SOLID
3 Further details in “Hexagonal architecture (software),” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Hexagonal_architecture_(software)
4 Further details in Jeffrey Palermo, “The Onion Architecture: part 1,” July 29, 2008,  
https://jeffreypalermo.com/2008/07/the-onion-architecture-part-1/
Chapter 3  Defining an Event-Driven Microservice and Its Boundaries

---

## Page 104

90
They strive to provide a clean separation of concerns through the segregation of 
the software into layers. They also emphasize the business logic as the focus of the 
application. The business logic also has no dependencies or references, the outer 
layer references the domain models, but the domain models don’t reference anything. 
Figure 3-2 illustrates a typical microservice with the clean architecture.
'DWDEDVH
3UHVHQWDWLRQ,QIUDVWUXFWXUH
$SSOLFDWLRQ
'RPDLQ
'RPDLQ
6HUYLFHV
$SSOLFDWLRQ
6HUYLFHV
5HSRVLWRULHV
0HVVDJH
KDQGOHUV
0HVVDJH
TXHXH
0HVVDJH
6HQGHUV
'DWD$FFHVV
2EMHFWV
7KHFRUHRIWKH
DSSOLFDWLRQLVWKH
GRPDLQDQGFRGH
GHSHQGHQFLHVDOZD\V
SRLQWLQZDUGV
$SSOLFDWLRQ
6HUYLFHV
$3,
6RXUFHFRGH
GHSHQGHQFLHV
([WHUQDO
GHSHQGHQFLHV
Figure 3-2.  An application using clean architecture; the code dependencies are 
always inward. The domain layer is the core of the architecture and hasn’t any 
references to other layers
Chapter 3  Defining an Event-Driven Microservice and Its Boundaries

---

## Page 105

91
We only reference external dependencies in the outer layer. Code in each layer can 
solely depend on references to the inner layers. The core layer holds the domain logic 
and domain entities and can’t reference anything in the outer layers. This way, anything 
in the outer layer can’t impact the inner layers. Outside layers typically have concrete 
implementations, while the inner layers grow more abstract as we advance to the core. 
Figure 3-2 only shows three layers, but it is just an example; an application can have as 
many layers as needed. The application layer, which holds the application business logic, 
can have an additional layer with interface adapters in charge of adapting data between 
the presentation layer and application logic.
Having the external dependencies on the outer layer means we reference every tool, 
driver, or framework in that layer. Having external dependencies referenced only on the 
outer layer promotes the separation of the application and domain logic from external 
tools. Often, the limitations of these frameworks or technologies entangle themselves 
on the application’s logic. Moving them to the outer layer promotes the modeling and 
evolution of the logic without the influence of outside tools. We often hear “If we need 
to exchange databases, we can do it without affecting the inner logic.” Separation of 
concerns is an essential coding principle, but how often do we exchange databases 
anyway? Database constraints tend to leak toward application logic (e.g., managing 
transactions between several models) or framework updates that span all applications. 
The outer layer helps prevent these common issues.
Also, domain logic shouldn’t know anything about what we implemented in the 
outer layers. The independence from outside references (like the data reference in 
the N-tier architecture) helps the business rules evolve as needed and reflect what the 
business intends. Changes in how we authenticate users, how we publish events, or 
how we log changes shouldn’t affect the business rules. Having this kind of separation 
and isolation, they won’t. Figure 3-3 illustrates two services using this architecture, 
interacting through a message queue.
Chapter 3  Defining an Event-Driven Microservice and Its Boundaries

---

## Page 106

92
If, for example, the messaging framework we are using in both services becomes 
deprecated, upgrading it will only affect the outer layer. It eases the replacement of 
external dependencies, and it also promotes single-purpose unit tests in each layer.
We can apply to each microservice the clean architecture. Still, as we add more 
functionalities and new services, we might create smaller services that aren’t that rich 
in domain or application logic. First, as we mentioned in Chapter 2, it is advisable to 
develop services that encapsulate a subset of the system but a more extensive and 
autonomous domain. Creating larger coarse-grained services, in the beginning, will 
naturally contain the expansion of the number of services to a sustainable pace. They 
will also depend less on external services that are easier to manage while building the 
architecture. It will reduce the number of remote calls each service has to do and lessen 
the impact of weak consistency since each service will manage its domain locally. As we 
mentioned in Chapter 2, we should gradually build the system, adding coarse-grained 
services first and then, when needed, advancing to fine-grained services with lesser 
responsibilities.
As we evolve the architecture and create more fine-grained services, we might have 
smaller services that own part of the overall architecture’s responsibilities. Figure 3-4 
illustrates an example where there is a service to manage the domain logic.
0HVVDJH
TXHXH
7KHGRPDLQEHWZHHQWKH
WZRHYHQWGULYHQVHUYLFHVLV
GHFRXSOHGIURPWKHZD\
WKH\SXEOLVKPHVVDJHVDQG
DFFHVVGDWD
6RXUFHFRGH
GHSHQGHQFLHV
([WHUQDO
GHSHQGHQFLHV
'DWDEDVH
3UHVHQWDWLRQ,QIUDVWUXFWXUH
$SSOLFDWLRQ
'RPDLQ
'RPDLQ
6HUYLFHV
$SSOLFDWLRQ
6HUYLFHV
5HSRVLWRULHV
$SSOLFDWLRQ
6HUYLFHV
'DWD$FFHVV
2EMHFWV
0HVVDJH
KDQGOHUV
0HVVDJH
6HQGHUV
$3,
0HVVDJH
'DWDEDVH
3UHVHQWDWLRQ,QIUDVWUXFWXUH
$SSOLFDWLRQ
'RPDLQ
'RPDLQ
6HUYLFHV
$SSOLFDWLRQ
6HUYLFHV
5HSRVLWRULHV
$SSOLFDWLRQ
6HUYLFHV
KDQGOHUV
0HVVDJH
6HQGHUV
'DWD$FFHVV
2EMHFWV
$3,
Figure 3-3.  Two event-driven services with clean architectures interacting through 
a message queue. The domain is isolated from the way the applications send events 
and access data
Chapter 3  Defining an Event-Driven Microservice and Its Boundaries

---

## Page 107

93
Other services like the read model and process manager operate the application 
logic, and the anti-corruption layer works as an adapter between external and internal 
information. The API service exposes the boundary’s information.
There are pitfalls associated with having fine-grained services that we need to 
avoid. Such a small scope often increases the risk of having lockstep releases, where a 
functionality spans several services and requires coordination to deploy them in the 
live environment. Microservices should be autonomous, and a release of one service 
shouldn’t affect others. Also, services with a small scope will rapidly increase the 
number of services, increasing the system’s complexity, and exponentiate the challenges 
of distributed systems discussed in Chapter 1. We can contain those challenges by 
organizing the services into boundaries, as illustrated in Figure 3-4. However, creating 
coarse-grained services first and using fine-grained services later is a better approach to 
decompose the system incrementally.
3UHVHQWDWLRQ,QIUDVWUXFWXUH
$SSOLFDWLRQ
$SSOLFDWLRQ
6HUYLFHV
$SSOLFDWLRQ
6HUYLFHV
'RPDLQ
'RPDLQ
6HUYLFHV
'DWDEDVH
0HVVDJH
KDQGOHUV
0HVVDJH
6HQGHUV
'DWD$FFHVV
2EMHFWV
$3,
5HSRVLWRULHV
:LWKILQHJUDLQHGVHUYLFHVHDFKVHUYLFH
PLJKWRZQWKHUHVSRQVLELOLWLHV
RIRQHRUDVXEVHWRIOD\HUV
$SSOLFDWLRQ
'RPDLQ
3UHVHQWDWLRQ
'RPDLQ
%RXQGDU\
'RPDLQ6HUYLFH
3URFHVV
0DQDJHU
$3,
$QWL&RUUXSWLRQ
/D\HU
5HDG0RGHO
'%
8,2WKHU
ERXQGDULHV
'%
,QGLYLGXDO
VHUYLFH
8,2WKHU
ERXQGDULHV
Figure 3-4.  As we create more fine-grained services, a subset of services inside a 
domain boundary might map with one or a subset of clean architecture layers
Chapter 3  Defining an Event-Driven Microservice and Its Boundaries

---

## Page 108

94
3.1.3  Event-Driven Microservices: Durable vs. Ephemeral 
Message Brokers and GDPR
The availability of messages after consumption and the underlying messaging semantics 
are the foundation for data streaming and provide a novel way to share data. Message 
brokers can have durable or ephemeral messages depending on the broker we choose. 
Typical messaging has ephemeral messages; however, having durable messages 
potentiates the useful use cases we mentioned in Chapter 1 and which we will detail 
throughout the book. In this section, we will discuss the two approaches of using durable 
or ephemeral message brokers.
Traditional message brokers are built to have short-lived messaging; published 
messages typically are removed once consumed. A famous example is RabbitMQ that is 
designed for destructive consuming semantics; once the consumer acknowledges the 
message, the broker removes the message from the queue. RabbitMQ also features5 an 
append-only log data structure and will provide non-destructive messages besides the 
current destructive semantics.
With the rise of the Internet and continuous data growth, event streaming became 
increasingly relevant, along with durable message brokers. Durable messages remain 
readily available even after processed by the consumers. Streaming is about enabling 
a distributed and ordered flow of events. Durable messaging allows the stream to be 
processed as many times as needed. A famous example is Kafka, which is a distributed 
event streaming platform and provides a persisted event log. Like the event stream in 
Kafka, durable events are always available even after an application has consumed them. 
Other consumers can access the event stream, or existing consumers can reprocess the 
same messages if needed.
As with many of the technologies we use, the decision is about weighing tradeoffs. 
Using durable or ephemeral message brokers in every use case might not always be 
the right decision; it depends on what we need them for and its use case. Ephemeral 
message brokers like RabbitMQ have a high focus on point-to-point communications 
and routing messages to specific channels. Short-lived messaging is usually best for 
consumers who can process the messages fast and don’t retain the broker’s messages 
for long periods. These brokers often struggle when large numbers of messages pile up 
5 See Brian McClain, “Understanding the Differences Between RabbitMQ vs Kafka,” November 16, 
2020, https://tanzu.vmware.com/developer/blog/understanding-the-differences- 
between-rabbitmq-vs-kafka/
Chapter 3  Defining an Event-Driven Microservice and Its Boundaries

---

## Page 109

95
in the queues and are best used for instantaneous low-scale communications. In our 
experience using RabbitMQ for years in production on a high-throughput platform, we 
struggled sparingly with message load peaks that affected the whole cluster. When the 
entire cluster struggles, it will likely affect unrelated services and have daunting impacts, 
even imperiling the whole platform. Looking back, the use case for RabbitMQ might not 
be the best in that situation because we didn’t need short-lived messaging.
For event-driven architectures, durable message brokers have high synergy with 
the event-driven mindset. Exposing the application state and maintaining it for 
any consumer in the form of events potentiate powerful possibilities and provide a 
sustainable way to share data throughout the company. Brokers like Kafka can also 
horizontally scale and manage vast amounts of messages, often achieving6 better 
throughput and performance than typical short-lived message brokers. However, non-­
destructive message semantics usually has an associated cost and overhead of adding 
new brokers due to the need to replicate the data between nodes. Overall, event-driven 
architectures greatly benefit from durable message brokers, and many use cases become 
notoriously simple by having one. As we will see, many of the patterns we discuss in this 
book benefit from durable message brokers.
The Right to Be Forgotten and Other Security Concerns
Durable message brokers imply a challenging concern about securing the data. There 
is a lot of value in every event being available in the broker for any consumer even after 
consumption and requires dedicated security strategies. Typically, data that is no longer 
needed often is a security risk. Durable event brokers also raise several challenges 
guaranteeing compliance with regulations like GDPR (general data protection 
regulation). Compliance with the right to erasure or right to be forgotten is particularly 
challenging in an event-driven mindset. As we discussed, durable event brokers persist 
the event stream and provide access to it to any consumer. When a user wants to be 
removed from the system, we also store data associated with the user in the message 
broker, and we need a way to destroy that data. Ephemeral message brokers naturally 
comply with these requirements since they remove messages after consumption.
6 See “Benchmarking Apache Kafka, Apache Pulsar, and RabbitMQ: Which is the Fastest?”, August 
21, 2020, www.confluent.io/blog/kafka-fastest-messaging-system/
Chapter 3  Defining an Event-Driven Microservice and Its Boundaries

---

## Page 110

96
Deleting an entity in an event-driven mindset is often accomplished by an event 
signaling the deletion of an entity (e.g., if the entity is an order, the service deleting 
the order would publish an order deleted event). This concept is often referred to as a 
tombstone; Cassandra, a popular NoSQL database, for example, when deleting a record, 
doesn’t immediately purge it from the disk; instead, it writes a value signaling the record 
was deleted.
Theoretically, event streams reflect what happened, the history of the entity with 
all its evolution; every event is the reflection of a unique operation and shouldn’t be 
deleted, the same way we can’t delete history and what happened in times past. Many 
durable event brokers don’t have straightforward, built-in ways to delete specific events 
and often require ad hoc solutions.
For example, the right to be forgotten introduces a unique challenge; if we shouldn’t 
delete events, how can we comply with that requirement? Ephemeral message brokers 
deal with this naturally since the broker effectively deletes messages after consumption. 
Since the broker deletes them, it organically complies with the requirement, and we do 
not need a strategy to deal with data deletion.
An approach to solve this challenge is using crypto shredding. Crypto shredding is 
a strategy to destroy data by losing the encryption keys needed to understand the data. 
Encrypted data can only be understood by decrypting it with the corresponding key. 
By deleting or overriding the key, the data is inoperable. Encryption is also a common 
requirement and needed to achieve compliance with GDPR, having a synergy between 
encrypting the events and using crypto shredding to destroy data. Figure 3-5 illustrates 
how we could apply crypto shredding to event-driven services.
Chapter 3  Defining an Event-Driven Microservice and Its Boundaries

---

## Page 111

97
,QYHQWRU\
6HUYLFH
2UGHU
6HUYLFH







.H\0DQDJHPHQW
6\VWHP
(FU\SW
'HFU\SW
,QYHQWRU\
6HUYLFH
2UGHU
6HUYLFH

"




"
.H\0DQDJHPHQW
6\VWHP
(FU\SW
'HFU\SW
7KHSURGXFHUHQFU\SWVWKHGDWDEHIRUH
SXEOLVKLQJXVLQJDNH\VWRUHGLQDNH\
PDQDJHPHQWV\VWHP7KHFRQVXPHUXVHVWKH
VDPHNH\WRGHFU\SWWKHPHVVDJH
7RUHPRYHWKH\HOORZXVHUZHFDQ
GHVWUR\WKHNH\DQGWKHGDWDZLOOEH
XQXVDEOH
2QHNH\SHUXVHU
Figure 3-5.  Example of using crypto shredding to destroy messages associated 
with a user
Chapter 3  Defining an Event-Driven Microservice and Its Boundaries

---

## Page 112

98
The order service encrypts the data using a key in a key management system. Each 
user has a different key, and we encrypt each user’s events with the respective key. 
The inventory service to use the data has to decrypt the events by using the same key 
used to encrypt. If a user wants to be removed from the system, we can destroy the key 
associated with that user and the data will be unusable.
Applying this strategy to a complex architecture with several microservices can 
become challenging since each one of them would have to implement this strategy. 
Often, not all services need encryption and deal with sensitive data. Identifying and 
isolating the sensible data to the services that need them and applying this strategy 
only to those services can also be a good approach. There is also the option to use this 
strategy at the infrastructure level avoiding the implementation effort in all services. We 
can proxy the requests to a common module which has the responsibility to encrypt 
the data before publishing them to the broker. David Jacot details this approach in an 
interesting presentation7 by shipping containers with that additional module (known as 
a sidecar pattern) using Kafka.
3.1.4  Event-Driven Message Types
Traditional messaging uses messages somewhat indifferently; they are just a means 
to propagate data. In event-driven architectures however, there are different types of 
messages that have different purposes and different meanings. In this subsection, we will 
discuss the different types and in which situations they should be used.
Messages are usually composed of a header and a body. We can use the header 
to pass additional information common to all messages, much like HTTP headers. A 
typical example is the correlation id, which we often use to link several messages related 
to the same entity. For example, if we create a product and then edit its brand and 
category, each of the changes would publish a different event (e.g., the generated events 
correspondingly: ProductCreated, ProductBrandChanged, ProductCategoryChanged); 
all three events could have a header with the id of the product signaling they are all 
related to the same product. Although there isn’t a formal definition of what headers 
should a message have, we benefit from having a predefined set for the entire system. 
The correlation id we discussed before is a good example, but having other message 
7 See David Jacot, “Handling GDPR with Apache Kafka: How to Comply Without Freaking Out?”,  
May 13/14, 2019, www.confluent.io/kafka-summit-lon19/handling-gdpr-apache-kafka- 
comply-freaking-out/
Chapter 3  Defining an Event-Driven Microservice and Its Boundaries

---

## Page 113

99
headers like a message id that uniquely identifies each message can be useful for 
debugging purposes. The headers’ information must be chosen carefully in order to 
avoid flowing information that will have logic associated on the consumer side, like 
specific flags for specific processes. Often this kind of information can be forgotten, 
leading to errors on the consumption process or even assuming default values for the 
headers; Chapter 8 will further detail this subject. Having an event version or timestamp 
is also helpful for managing idempotency, as we will discuss in Chapters 5 and 6.
The message body has the full information we want to publish. Messages can be 
commands, events, or documents. Queries are also a common concept, and typically, 
they aren’t a message but a common concept in event-driven architectures.
•	
Commands are orders to perform a given action. We should 
name them with a verb in the imperative form, for example, 
CreateOrderCommand. A command is a request to a given service 
to perform an action and thus can be rejected or fail a validation. We 
can change aggregates by sending a command to perform a given 
action in that aggregate and often reflect a user’s action. Typically, 
commands affect one service and a specific domain; they usually 
aren’t published to several subscribers, only one. Although often 
commands are messages, a command can also be an HTTP request 
if the service receives changes through an API instead of a message 
broker.
•	
Events notify something that has changed in a given domain or 
aggregate. They are named in the past participle verb and inform that 
something has happened, for example, OrderCreatedEvent. They 
are facts and, unlike commands, aren’t liable to be rejected; they 
are something that already happened. Events are the most common 
block of event-driven architectures and are used to pass information 
and signal relevant changes throughout the architecture’s 
components. They are often published to several consumers and can 
accommodate new consumers in the future, unlike commands that 
are related to a single system.
Chapter 3  Defining an Event-Driven Microservice and Its Boundaries

---

## Page 114

100
•	
Documents are much like events; the service publishes them when 
a given aggregate or entity changes, but they contain all the entity’s 
information, unlike events which typically only have the information 
related to the change that originated the event. Although they often 
are triggered by changes in the aggregate, they often don’t give 
information about what change triggered the document, unless we 
specifically add it to the document. If someone changed an order 
address, the generated event could be OrderAddressChanged and 
contain the information about the new order’s address. The same 
change could trigger a document, for example, OrderDocument, 
which would have all the order information; each receiver would 
have to interpret it in the way that made sense to that service.
•	
Queries are requests of information issued to a given system to 
obtain the service’s data. Typically, they aren’t messages and are 
often synchronous requests like an HTTP request. They also don’t 
change state; they simply request information.
Figure 3-6 illustrates an example of an interaction between these entities.
Chapter 3  Defining an Event-Driven Microservice and Its Boundaries

---

## Page 115

101
A user placing an order would query the product’s stock to the inventory service and 
then trigger a CreateOrderCommand by submitting an order that would be consumed 
by the order service. Once the service creates the entity, it publishes a CreateOrderEvent 
and an OrderDocument which are consumed by the inventory service and the 
notification service, respectively. Commands, events, documents, and queries are the 
foundation for the patterns and topologies we discuss further in this chapter.
,QYHQWRU\
6HUYLFH
0HVVDJH4XHXH
3XEOLVKHV
2UGHU&UHDWHG(YHQW

3XEOLVKHV2UGHU'RFXPHQW
2UGHU
6HUYLFH
&RQVXPHV&UHDWH2UGHU&RPPDQG
0HVVDJH4XHXH
3XEOLVKHV&UHDWH2UGHU&RPPDQG
&UHDWHVRUGHU
4XHULHVLQYHQWRU\LQIRUPDWLRQ
8,
8VHU
0HVVDJH4XHXH
1RWLILFDWLRQ
6HUYLFH
$3,
([DPSOHRIDQLQWHUDFWLRQ
EHWZHHQFRPPDQGVHYHQWV
TXHULHVDQGGRFXPHQWVRI
DQXVHUEX\LQJDQRUGHU
Figure 3-6.  The interaction between commands, events, documents, and queries
Chapter 3  Defining an Event-Driven Microservice and Its Boundaries

---
