# 5. Practical.Event-Driven.Microservices.Architecture.Hugo.Filipe.Oliveira.Rocha.Apress.9781484274675.EBooksWorld.ir

> Extracted from: `5. Practical.Event-Driven.Microservices.Architecture.Hugo.Filipe.Oliveira.Rocha.Apress.9781484274675.EBooksWorld.ir.pdf` (pages 393-457)
> Total pages in PDF: 457

---

## Page 393

384
Each context has a different screen and maps to a respective service and domain. For 
example, the screen to manage the product’s price is dedicated to that task, reflecting 
the user’s intent more clearly. This design also helps to translate the user actions to 
commands. A change product price command semantic is more meaningful and has 
more domain value than an edit product command.
Task-based UIs usually map more cleanly and have higher synergy with distributed 
architectures due to building commands for each segregated task. Each task has a 
separate command, which most likely will translate to an event with similar meaning, 
paving the way for more meaningful and domain-rich event streams. Event streams 
that capture the user’s intent tend to be more valuable and more relevant for future 
requirements.
Typically, simple domains with straightforward processes don’t benefit much 
from this kind of approach. If the user’s operations are CRUD in nature, then a CRUD 
approach is obviously more beneficial. Event-driven architectures typically model 
complex domains; however, don’t fall into the trap of applying this kind of design 
everywhere. In complex architectures, there are several domains; some are intricate 
enough to benefit from this approach, while others might hardly benefit from it.
Arguably, the most useful benefit we can extract from task-based UIs, even when we 
end up not using them, is the focus on why and how the user is trying to achieve its goal. 
The usability and the nature of the business process are the cornerstones of the design.
9.6  Event-Driven APIs
The asynchronous nature of event-driven APIs often transforms an otherwise 
synchronous operation into an asynchronous one. For example, the order fulfillment 
process in a single-process application like a monolith could be a synchronous process 
for the order submissions that have all the conditions to be fulfilled. However, in an 
event-driven architecture, the order fulfillment is likely the choreography of several 
event-driven services. Asynchronous operations might be more common throughout 
the architecture. To ensure a friendly web experience, we might shift from synchronous 
CRUD UIs, where feedback was immediate, to UIs that show the progress of the request 
as it advances in the workflow, displaying a status or alerts to the user.
With the advent of reactive UIs, event-driven frontend implementations are 
becoming increasingly popular. They have high synergy with the asynchronous 
approach; as the state advances, asynchronous updates can be delivered to the user 
Chapter 9  How to Leverage the User Interface in Event-­Driven Microservice Architectures

---

## Page 394

385
seamlessly. Although older protocols like XMPP (Extensible Messaging and Presence 
Protocol) are still popular and traditionally used to provide this functionality, more 
recent and lightweight alternatives are available. WebSockets2 have become quite 
popular recently as a solution for two-way communication and bi-directional traffic. 
Server-Sent Events3 is also a valuable alternative approach, although focused on pushing 
new data to the client in one-way communication. WebHooks4 are also an interesting 
approach to implement one-way notifications to clients using custom callbacks. All three 
approaches are valid choices for asynchronous real-time communication, much like 
event-driven microservice architectures.
It’s peculiar how both backend and frontend embrace event-driven mindsets 
(although with very distinct use cases, tools, and at different scales), but the 
communication between them often uses synchronous HTTP API calls. In fact, for a long 
time, there was a scarce number of options to provide seamless backend asynchronous 
interfaces for UI applications to use. Microservice message brokers like Kafka or 
RabbitMQ might not be suitable to deliver asynchronous events to UI applications due to 
challenges with firewalls, lack of granular role or resource-based access control, and lack 
of clear standards and straightforward ways to access asynchronous events.
In fact, traditional synchronous APIs like REST are a common functionality in most 
platforms in no small measure due to clear, well-established standards. Standards like 
OpenAPI5 simplified the development and integration of different systems without 
the need for complex coordination. AsyncAPI6 is increasingly filling that gap in 
asynchronous APIs. It is an open source project based on OpenAPI that seeks to provide 
a specification for asynchronous implementations with a message-driven foundation. 
It supports several messaging protocols and provides tools to define the event schema 
and semantics to connect, subscribe, publish, and interact with the API. It also supports 
a wide range of tooling, similar to OpenAPI, like code generation, API discovery, and 
event management. It can be a valuable approach for documenting and designing your 
asynchronous APIs.
2 Protocol definition in “The WebSocket Protocol,” December 2011, https://datatracker.ietf.
org/doc/html/rfc6455
3 More information in “Server-send events,” https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/
API/Server-sent_events
4 Wikipedia page in “WebHook,” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Webhook
5 Specification in “OpenAPI Specification,” February 15, 2021, https://spec.openapis.org/oas/
v3.1.0
6 Specification in “AsyncAPI Specification,” www.asyncapi.com/docs/specifications/v2.0.0
Chapter 9  How to Leverage the User Interface in Event-­Driven Microservice Architectures

---

## Page 395

386
9.6.1  Event-Driven Combined with WebSockets
Let’s work through an example of how an asynchronous functionality could interact with 
the UI using WebSockets. Let’s say we have a UI to create products and the business only 
considers the product created once it is available on the product catalog to be managed. 
The product catalog is updated asynchronously, so it would be useful for the user to 
know when the product is available on the catalog. Figure 9-12 illustrates this example.
The user creates the product through the UI application, which triggers a request 
to the API component and the product service. The product service creates the product 
and publishes an event signaling that change, which the product catalog service uses to 
3URGXFW6HUYLFH
3URGXFW&DWDORJ
&UHDWHSURGXFW
UHTXHVW
:HE6RFNHWIUDPHV
FRPPXQLFDWLRQ
5HJLVWHUFOLHQW
)RUZDUGHYHQWIRU
FRUUHFW$3,LQVWDQFH
$3,
(YHQW
TXHXH
5HTXHVW
:HE6RFNHW
FRQQHFWLRQ
8,$SSOLFDWLRQ
+DQGOHVHYHQW
VLJQDOOLQJSURGXFW
ZDVXSGDWHG
(YHQW
TXHXH
&OLHQW0DQDJHU
3URGXFWFUHDWLRQLVSURSDJDWHGWR
GRZQVWUHDPVHUYLFHV
Figure 9-12.  Asynchronous product creation using WebSockets
Chapter 9  How to Leverage the User Interface in Event-­Driven Microservice Architectures

---

## Page 396

387
register that product in the catalog. The product catalog, which likely handles different 
streams to enrich a denormalized model of the products (similar to what we discussed in 
Figure 9-8), also publishes an event signaling the product creation.
The UI application first registers itself on the API and requests a WebSocket 
connection. The client manager is responsible for keeping track of the registered clients 
and handling the event signaling the product creation in the catalog. Each time a 
product is created, the client manager handles the event and informs the UI of successful 
product creation.
Why do we need the client manager component? Can’t we just handle the events 
from the API? The challenge of delivering events to the frontend applications is 
delivering the correct events to the right clients. All components can (and likely will) be 
horizontally scaled, meaning there will be several instances of each component. If there 
are several product catalog services, UI applications, and API instances, how can we 
guarantee the events will be delivered to the correct client that created the product?
A possible solution could be for each of the API instances to handle all events and 
filter those that correspond to the clients connected to that instance. It can be an option 
for low-scale use cases; however, it quickly becomes impracticable for large event 
streams. The client manager can help manage all existing clients and deliver each event 
to the corresponding API instance, which has a WebSocket connection to the client.
9.6.2  Event-Driven Combined with Server-Sent Events
In use cases, we don’t need a bi-directional communication channel; Server-Sent 
Events can be a valid alternative. Server-Sent Events is a subscribe-only protocol that 
provides a way to subscribe to an event stream and is a lightweight approach to deliver 
asynchronous data to the frontend applications.
The approach to the use case we discussed in the previous section with Server-Sent 
Events remains largely unaltered. Instead of using a two-way connection to the backend, 
the UI application opens a persistent connection to the API with the EventSource7 
object. The client manager component forwards the event stream to the API. Figure 9-13 
illustrates the same use case we discussed before.
7 More information in https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/EventSource
Chapter 9  How to Leverage the User Interface in Event-­Driven Microservice Architectures

---

## Page 397

388
Instead of having a bi-directional connection, the delivery of the event stream is 
one-way. Server-Sent Events also supports straightforward error handling, generating 
error events that can be more sustainable dealt with in the frontend application. One 
main difference from WebSockets is they use HTTP requests to maintain a persistent 
connection (also getting multiplexing over HTTP/2) instead of a dedicated protocol.
WebSockets tend to be more heavyweight in mobile use cases; since they establish 
a two-way connection, they require a full-duplex antenna, which in most use cases 
impacts the bandwidth and power consumption. Server-Sent Events implements 
3URGXFW6HUYLFH
3URGXFW&DWDORJ
&UHDWHSURGXFW
UHTXHVW
5HFHLYH
HYHQWVWUHDP
5HJLVWHUFOLHQW
)RUZDUGHYHQW
VWUHDP
$3,
(YHQW
TXHXH
6HQG
(YHQW6RXUFH
REMHFW
8,$SSOLFDWLRQ
+DQGOHVHYHQW
VLJQDOOLQJSURGXFW
ZDVXSGDWHG
(YHQW
TXHXH
&OLHQW0DQDJHU
3URGXFWFUHDWLRQLVSURSDJDWHGWR
GRZQVWUHDPVHUYLFHV
Figure 9-13.  Asynchronous product creation using Server-Sent Events
Chapter 9  How to Leverage the User Interface in Event-­Driven Microservice Architectures

---

## Page 398

389
unidirectional traffic through HTTP which, compared with WebSockets, tends to reduce 
the total data usage and battery power.8
9.6.3  Event-Driven Combined with WebHooks
Another alternative to implementing one-way asynchronous communication to the 
frontend applications is through WebHooks. WebHooks work in a reverse flow that we 
are used to; the subscriber registers a callback that the server will call to deliver the 
event stream (they are often dubbed as reverse APIs). Similar to Server-Sent Events, the 
communication occurs through HTTP and doesn’t apply any specialized protocol.
The main difference from the other alternatives is the callback mechanism. Let’s 
work through the same example we discussed in the previous section using WebHooks. 
The product creation flows through the product and product catalog service, and we 
deliver the corresponding event to the frontend application, as illustrated in Figure 9-14.
8 Full article in Martin Chaov, “Using SSE Instead Of WebSockets For Unidirectional Data Flow  
Over HTTP/2,” February 12, 2018, www.smashingmagazine.com/2018/02/sse-websockets- 
data-flow-http2/
Chapter 9  How to Leverage the User Interface in Event-­Driven Microservice Architectures

---

## Page 399

390
The frontend application subscribes to the event stream with an HTTP request to 
the API and registers a callback URL, which the backend will use to deliver the event 
stream. The product creation flows through the services, and the product catalog service 
will eventually generate an event signaling the change. The client manager will handle 
that event and deliver it to the callback module responsible for delivering the stream to 
the frontend application. To do so, the module will typically make a POST request to the 
callback API providing the new events.
The limitation of WebHooks resides in relying on an HTTP callback endpoint 
to deliver the events. Hosting a publicly exposed HTTP endpoint in user-facing 
applications like mobile apps or a browser is often impractical or even infeasible due to 
implementation and security concerns. Typically, WebHooks are applied to frontends or 
BFFs which are servers and can sustainably implement this feature. However, they are 
an interesting option when we need one-way communication for push notifications or 
event delivery.
3URGXFW6HUYLFH
3URGXFW&DWDORJ
&UHDWHSURGXFW
UHTXHVW
5HJLVWHU
VXEVFULSWLRQ
)RUZDUGHYHQW
VWUHDP
$3,
(YHQW
TXHXH
(YHQW
VXEVFULSWLRQ
)URQWHQG
+DQGOHVHYHQW
VLJQDOOLQJSURGXFW
ZDVXSGDWHG
(YHQW
TXHXH
&OLHQW0DQDJHU
3URGXFWFUHDWLRQLVSURSDJDWHGWR
GRZQVWUHDPVHUYLFHV
$3,
&DOOEDFN
0RGXOH
&DOOEDFN
$3,

&UHDWH
SURGXFW
UHTXHVW
Figure 9-14.  Asynchronous product creation using WebHooks
Chapter 9  How to Leverage the User Interface in Event-­Driven Microservice Architectures

---

## Page 400

391
9.7  Summary
•	
An aggregating layer can help optimize the bandwidth and response 
time when we need to aggregate data from different services. It’s 
typically best applied to simple applications and contained use cases. 
We should avoid the pitfall of adding too much responsibility to the 
aggregating layer; if code has a place to gravitate to, it typically will.
•	
BFFs can abstract the downstream platform functionalities and 
provide higher segregation of responsibilities, thus avoiding adding 
too much responsibility to a single aggregating layer. They also 
enable a close optimization of the UI needs without the worry of 
coupling platform features to specific UI use cases.
•	
We can decompose a UI application into smaller components to best 
adapt to the underlying microservice platform. Decomposition can 
be done at the application, page, and section level; we can adapt each 
pattern to the most adequate use case.
•	
API composition is a useful and straightforward solution for 
obtaining the data to display in a small number of requests. However, 
in use cases that require comprehensive filtering and ordering 
requirements, building a dedicated model might be a reasonable 
approach to guarantee acceptable performance.
•	
Task-based UIs usually have higher synergy with distributed 
architectures due to building commands for each segregated task. 
They also are typically built to help the user advance in a journey and 
guide him to accomplish a process. Each change also maps more 
cleanly to the user’s intent, making it easier to map to commands for 
each domain.
•	
Event-driven APIs can be a valuable alternative to traditional 
synchronous APIs in event-driven architectures. We can use them 
to asynchronously inform the user of changes in the ecosystems in a 
sustainable manner.
Chapter 9  How to Leverage the User Interface in Event-­Driven Microservice Architectures

---

## Page 401

392
•	
To implement event-driven APIs, we can use WebSockets, Server-­
Sent Events, and WebHooks. WebSockets provide a way to implement 
two-way communication between the UI and the backend. Server-­
Sent Events and WebHooks are good options for one-way event 
delivery and push notifications.
Chapter 9  How to Leverage the User Interface in Event-­Driven Microservice Architectures

---

## Page 402

393
© Hugo Filipe Oliveira Rocha 2022 
H. F. Oliveira Rocha, Practical Event-Driven Microservices Architecture,  
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-7468-2_10
CHAPTER 10
Overcoming the 
Challenges in Quality 
Assurance
This chapter covers:
•	
Understanding the different kinds of tests and their scope in the 
overall architecture
•	
The challenges of guaranteeing the quality of the end-to-end flow in 
event-driven services
•	
Using contract testing and consumer-driven contracts as core 
concepts in the quality assurance process
•	
Strategies to safely validate functionality in the production 
environment
As systems evolved from overly complex single units to constellations of highly 
distributed smaller components, in many ways and in many businesses, quality 
assurance seems to be left behind. It’s peculiar how we evolved our architecture designs, 
development processes, and deployment strategies to accommodate the paradigm shift 
of highly scalable distributed architectures, but the practices of quality assurance remain 
roughly the same.

---

## Page 403

394
We came a long way from the manual validations and lengthy regression testing 
of traditional applications and embraced, as we should, the joys of automated testing. 
However, to guarantee the correctness of the end-to-end flow as the end user sees it, 
we often rely on the same approaches we always did, by deploying all functionality in a 
quality environment and running manual or automated validations against the whole 
system. There is a mismatch between this approach and the very core principles of 
distributed microservice architectures and of independent deployment procedures and 
autonomous release cycles.
Despite the other kind of difficulties and limitations, monoliths provide the means 
to easily perform end-to-end validations. By having a single deployable unit, it’s often 
possible (although not always easy) to deploy the application and its dependencies to 
test the end-to-end flow. When dealing with an architecture composed of dozens or 
even hundreds of independent components, it easily gets extremely complex to perform 
pre-production validations against the whole end-to-end flow. The practices of DevOps 
and continuous delivery promote a fast feature delivery flow in order to provide fast 
feedback. The autonomous release cycle of each independent service in microservice 
architectures is a way to achieve it. However, how are we able to accomplish 
independent deployments of each component while validating the integrity of the end-­
to-­end flow?
The typical test categories ranging from unit to integration tests still apply to 
event-driven architectures. They provide higher decoupling characteristics which we 
can combine to achieve the more sustainable approaches we discuss in this chapter. 
Depending on the use case and the conditions of your company, you might still need to 
invest in complex end-to-end tests; however, as we will discuss at the end of the chapter, 
we will challenge you to adopt more sustainable and scalable approaches by combining 
a pre-production quality assurance process with safe production validations.
10.1  Microservice Testing Approaches and How 
They Relate to Event-Driven
There’s a lot of confusion in the definition of the several types of tests. Integration, 
component, and end-to-end tests are often used interchangeably and change their 
meaning depending on the context. In this section, we will explain the different 
categories of tests, their scope, and how they apply to event-driven services.
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 404

395
There are several categories of tests in software engineering; you most likely came 
across several of them while developing new functionality. In the past, manual testing 
was a substantial step of the quality assurance process, although thankfully most 
businesses have been focusing on a more automation mindset. Most types of tests still 
apply to event-driven services, the same as they would in a traditional application or a 
monolith.
Event-driven architectures often imply a considerable number of components and 
frequent releases. As we will discuss in the next section, a strong automation mindset 
is pivotal for the success of these systems. Manual testing is still useful, but rather than 
having people doing a suite of repetitive tasks on every release, test automation frees 
them to do more meaningful work by interacting with the application in unexpected or 
creative ways (through, for example, exploratory testing).
10.1.1  Unit Tests
Unit tests validate functionality on a section of code inside a service. Typically, in the 
context of a function or class, there isn’t any hard rule on how small they should be. 
Unit tests should be present throughout the several layers of the service’s architecture. 
You might recall when we discussed the event-driven service’s architecture in Chapter 3 
and worked through the N-tier and clean architecture. Each service typically has several 
layers with dedicated responsibilities. Each of these layers will have unit tests to validate 
the layer’s functionality on the smallest possible scope. Figure 10-1 illustrates how unit 
tests fit in the overall event-driven architecture.
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 405

396
Figure 10-1 illustrates the inventory service with several layers. It consumes events 
from the order service and publishes events to the product catalog service. It also 
does a synchronous request to the location service. Unit tests sit on each of the service 
layers validating solely the layer’s functionality. If the piece of code the test is validating 
has a dependency on an external resource, like the database or external service or 
even another layer, the test mocks that request and focuses solely on the functionality 
implemented by that piece of code.
Although unit tests are fast and usually performant, it doesn’t mean they are free. A 
pitfall I often see companies with strong unit testing culture fall into is creating unit tests 
for every line of code, whether it makes sense or not. Remember unit tests are code and 
'DWD
,QYHQWRU\6HUYLFH
'%
'RPDLQ
$SSOLFDWLRQ
*DWHZD\V
3UHVHQWDWLRQ
6HUYLFHV
/RFDWLRQ
6HUYLFH
0HVVDJH
TXHXH
0HVVDJH
TXHXH
2UGHU6HUYLFH
3URGXFW
&DWDORJ
6HUYLFH
8QLWWHVWV
SUHVHQWLQ
HDFKOD\HU
YDOLGDWLQJ
WKHVFRSHRI
DVPDOO
SLHFHRI
IXQFWLRQDOLW\
8QLWWHVWV
6HUYLFH/D\HUV
6HUYLFHV
Figure 10-1.  Unit tests on an event-driven service
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 406

397
have a maintenance cost; we need to maintain them. Code with hardly any logic likely 
doesn’t need a test. People often measure quality by test code coverage; although it can 
be an indicator (among many) alone, it doesn’t mean much, and struggling to have 100% 
code coverage won’t benefit you much. Instead, it might hinder your velocity due to 
the maintenance overhead. Be pragmatic, measure the cost, and understand if the test 
makes sense.
Having said that, unit tests are the fastest feedback loop we have access to, they 
usually are extremely fast to run, and we can expect applications to have large quantities 
of them. They are extremely useful to validate small scoped functionality. They also are 
good as an indicator of the code organization; if a unit test is considerably large or has 
extensive responsibility, it’s often an indicator the code might need to be refactored and 
divided.
10.1.2  Component Tests
Unit tests are great to validate localized and small scoped functionality inside a service 
layer but provide no guarantees on how the several layers interact with each other to 
compose the overall service features. Component tests fill that gap; they validate the full 
code flow inside a service, going through every layer, but only in that service’s scope, 
removing external dependencies.
Component tests don’t exert external dependencies like the database, external 
services, or message brokers; they focus only on the functionality inside the boundaries 
of the service. You can see it as testing anything the service does as a single process, 
without running anything else. Figure 10-2 illustrates the component tests scope.
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 407

398
In this case, suppose the inventory service reacts to order created events to process 
stock, saves state in the database, and publishes a stock changed event. A component 
test for this flow could be the full flow of the order event processing without using the 
database, the message broker, or the location service.
A way to easily abstract the external dependencies is using dependency injection. 
While running the tests, the service can inject mock implementations and fake the 
normal or abnormal responses of external dependencies validating the correctness of 
the service.
'DWD
,QYHQWRU\6HUYLFH
'%
'RPDLQ
$SSOLFDWLRQ
*DWHZD\V
3UHVHQWDWLRQ
6HUYLFHV
/RFDWLRQ
6HUYLFH
0HVVDJH
TXHXH
0HVVDJH
TXHXH
2UGHU6HUYLFH
3URGXFW
&DWDORJ
6HUYLFH
&RPSRQHQW
WHVWVVFRSH
6HUYLFHOD\HUV
6HUYLFHV
QYH
DL
HQ
Q
QWRU\6HUYLF
'
FH
'DW
'DW
'

WD
'
,
RP
QY
PD
YHQ
DLQ
QWRU\6HUYLYLFH
'D
H
DWD
DWD
'
D
'R
,Q
PD
PD

FDW
LRQ
R
LFD
*
WLR
WLR
SOLF
*D
*D
DW
DWL
SOL
*DW
*DW
WD
SS
DWH
DWH
QWD
QWD
$S
WHZ
WHZ
HQ
$S
HZD
HZ
VH
VH
$
ZD\
ZD
HV
HVH
$
ZD\V
D\V
UHV
HV

\V
\V
3UH
3UH

\V
\V
3U
3U
3
Q
RQ
WLR
Q
DWLR
RQ
V
FHV
FH
LFH
LF
YLF
YLF
YLYLF
UY
UY
UY
UY
HU
HU
6HU
6H
6H
&RPSRQHQWWHVWVYDOLGDWH
WKHIXQFWLRQDOLW\DFURVV
VHYHUDOVHUYLFHOD\HUV
EXWDOZD\VLQWKHVFRSH
RIRQO\RQHVHUYLFH
ZLWKRXWGHSHQGHQFLHV
Figure 10-2.  Component tests scope in an event-driven service
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 408

399
Component tests are useful to validate the soundness of the sequence of steps or 
overall workflow of the service in a way unit tests aren’t supposed to due to their limited 
scope. Well implemented, they can also be extremely fast due to the lack of direct 
dependencies; everything can be run in memory.
However, since they abstract the dependencies to the external resources, they don’t 
prevent bugs in their direct implementation. For example, if the inventory service is 
using a SQL database, we could write a component test to validate the order created 
event processing logic, but if we had an issue in the SQL query, the test wouldn’t likely be 
able to detect it since the repository would be mocked.
10.1.3  Extended Component Tests
A way to mitigate the risk of issues in the implementation of the external dependencies 
(like the example of the SQL query we just discussed) is to use an extended version of 
the component tests. Instead of completely removing the external dependencies, we 
can use the in-memory version of those dependencies. For example, if the service has a 
database, we can use an in-memory implementation of the database. It can behave the 
same way a database would, and it would allow validating the soundness of the query. 
Figure 10-3 illustrates the same use case but with in-memory components of the external 
dependencies.
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 409

400
As you can see in the example, the external dependencies were replaced by their 
in-memory equivalent. The exception is the location service; it likely won’t have an 
in-memory equivalent available since it is a service built in-house, but we can replace it 
with a mock or a stub. Extended component tests can paint a comprehensive scenario of 
the service and provide exceptionally valuable validations while not suffering from the 
drawbacks of managing external dependencies. They are able to validate the interactions 
with external dependencies while still being able to run extremely fast. The lack of 
external dependencies also facilitates the setup, running the tests locally, and simplifies 
,QYHQWRU\6HUYLFH
'DWD
'%
'RPDLQ
$SSOLFDWLRQ
*DWHZD\V
3UHVHQWDWLRQ
6HUYLFHV
/RFDWLRQ
6HUYLFH
0HVVDJH
TXHXH
0HVVDJH
TXHXH
2UGHU6HUYLFH
3URGXFW
&DWDORJ
6HUYLFH
7HVWVVFRSH
6HUYLFHOD\HUV
LQPHPRU\
GHSHQGHFLHV
D
'R
'RP
RPD Q
HUYLFH
H 
,Q
'
QYH
'D
'
HQ
DWD
DWD
'
WRU
RP
RP
U\
PD
PD
\6
DLQ
DLQ
HUYLFH
H
,QY
'
YH
DW
'DW
'
HQWRU\6H
V
HV
HV
FH
LFH
LFLF
Q
YLF
YLF
RQ
RQ
HUY
LRQ
LR
6HU
6
WLR
DWLR
DWLR
DWLR
6H
6H
DWL
DWL
DW
DW
6
FDW
FD
*
QWD
QWD
LFD
OLFD
*
QW
QW
SOLF
*D
*D
HQ
HQ
SSO
SS
*DWH
DW
DWH
DWH
VH
VH
SS
$SS
DWHZ
DWH
DWHZ
DWHZ
HV
HV
$S
HZ
HZ
UH
$
HZD
ZD
ZD
ZD
3UH
3UH
$
ZD\
ZD
ZD\
ZD\
3U


D\V
D\V
D\V
\V
3


\V
\V
\V
\V
:HFDQH[WHQG
FRPSRQHQWWHVWVWR
XVHLQPHPRU\
HTXLYDOHQWVRI
H[WHUQDO
GHSHQGHQFLHV
,QPHPRU\
GDWDEDVH
/RFDWLRQ
6HUYLFH
0RFN
,QPHPRU\
EURNHU
,QPHPRU\
EURNHU
2XWVLGHWKH
WHVW
VVFRSH
Figure 10-3.  Extended component tests with in-memory dependencies
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 410

401
the release process; since the release pipeline won’t need to manage the dependencies, 
only the service and the tests.
If they sound too good to be true, it’s perhaps they often are. In theory, it’s a great 
setup, but implementing them in practice is often hard due to the inexistence of the 
in-memory replacements of the external dependencies. There are some providers 
of in-memory database equivalents, for example, Microsoft’s in-memory entity 
framework provider,1 that can provide similar features of a real database without using 
external components. However, these providers often fall short of the actual, real-­
life implementations. Often implementations don’t fully match the full features of a 
real database. Transactions, the ACID guarantees, aren’t real when run in memory; 
everything works instantaneously and without the restraints of a real database.2 H2 
database engine3 is also an interesting alternative to emulate databases in memory; 
however, it suffers from similar limitations and doesn’t provide compatibility to all 
functionality. What people often end up doing is having an integration test against a 
real database validating the same thing, which raises the question of why to have the 
extended component test in the first place.
If you are using Java, Kafka has an embedded Kafka implementation which is a very 
interesting in-memory equivalent. Since both Kafka and ZooKeeper (for older Kafka 
versions) are Java applications, it is possible to run them from Java code. However, 
it doesn’t reflect all implications of a real Kafka cluster.4 ElasticSearch also had an 
embedded alternative that could be used for testing; however, it was discontinued due 
to the difficulties of maintaining compatibility with new features (in this case security-­
related5).
A very promising alternative is using Testcontainers.6 They can provide an easy way 
for tests to use and run containerized instances of most databases. RabbitMQ, Kafka, 
and most message brokers provide containers that are compatible with this approach. 
1 More information in “EF Core In-Memory Database Provider,” October 27, 2016,  
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/ef/core/providers/in-memory/?tabs=dotnet-core-cli
2 Full article by Jimmy Bogard, “Avoid In-Memory Databases for Tests,” March 18, 2020,  
https://jimmybogard.com/avoid-in-memory-databases-for-tests/
3 Home page at www.h2database.com/html/main.html
4 Full article by Ivan Ponomarev and John Roesler, “Testing Kafka Streams – A Deep Dive,” August 18, 
2020, www.confluent.io/blog/testing-kafka-streams/
5 More details by Clinton Gormley, “Elasticsearch, the server,” August 30, 2016, www.elastic.co/
pt/blog/elasticsearch-the-server
6 Home page at www.testcontainers.org/
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 411

402
Although they aren’t actually component tests but are perhaps halfway between 
integration and component tests (half-breed integration tests as we will discuss in 
Subsection 10.1.5), they can provide a reliable way to set up real dependencies with real-­
life scenarios. Unlike the H2 database engine, they provide full database compatibility,7 
since the actual database runs in a container.
For most use cases we’ve seen, teams tend to struggle to find reliable alternatives 
for external dependencies. But it really depends on the dependency; some of them 
might have valuable in-memory alternatives which we can use. They can complement 
integration tests well by limiting the number of integration tests and move most 
validations to faster and more reliable component tests. But most often than not, the 
alternatives are limited and can be used on somewhat niche or simple use cases.
10.1.4  Integration Tests
The meaning of integration tests has a lot of ambiguity, different references mention 
different scopes, and there’s usually some confusion between component, integration, 
and end-to-end tests. We will define them with arguably the most consensual 
definition; tests designed to validate the communication and relationship with external 
dependencies. The tests validate the actual interaction with external components like 
databases, message brokers, other services, distributed caches, etc. We can approach 
them in two ways, on a smaller scope by validating only the interaction with each 
external dependency and nothing else or on a broader scope by validating the full 
business flow including the external components.
In the context of event-driven services, they usually include the interaction with the 
message broker but not with the service publishing messages. However, they usually 
include services with a synchronous dependency like an HTTP request. Event-driven 
services are decoupled by the event broker so it is a sound decision to relinquish other 
services in the message flow to the broader end-to-end tests. The consequence of direct 
synchronous requests between two services is higher coupling; thus, the requesting 
service can be directly affected by an issue with the target service. Hence, integration 
tests often include synchronous dependencies in their scope. Figure 10-4 illustrates the 
scope of integration tests.
7 Further details at www.testcontainers.org/modules/databases/
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 412

403
These tests are often slower and more brittle than the ones we discussed until 
now. We need to guarantee there are the right conditions for the execution of the tests, 
the database needs to have the relevant data, caches need to be cleared, the existing 
messages in the broker must not affect the result of the tests, and so on. Guaranteeing 
these kinds of conditions on a daily basis can be complex to manage and often originate 
false positives. Containers can help with this; if we run containers and then remove them 
on a per test or per test session basis, it can help with these issues.
The direct dependency on the location service can be even harder to tackle. We 
need to guarantee we have a valid live version of the location service with relevant data 
for our test cases. If the location service has several dependencies, it can be even harder 
'DWD
,QYHQWRU\6HUYLFH
'%
'RPDLQ
$SSOLFDWLRQ
*DWHZD\V
3UHVHQWDWLRQ
6HUYLFHV
0HVVDJH
TXHXH
0HVVDJH
TXHXH
2UGHU6HUYLFH
3URGXFW
&DWDORJ
6HUYLFH
7HVWVVFRSH
6HUYLFHOD\HUV
6HUYLFHV
D
WD
'R
'R
DWD
DWD
'
WRU\6H
'
6HUY
'%
'%
UYLF
%
FH
'DW
DW


,
RP
,QY
PD
YHQ
LQ
QWRU\6H
'
UY
%
LFH
D
'R
,Q
PD
QYH
DLQ
HQW
Q
'D
'D
'
*D
*D
*DW
*DW
DWH
DWH
$SS
DWHZ
DWHZ
$S
HZD
HZD
$
ZD\
ZD\

D\V
D\V

D\V
D\V

V
OLF
Q
DWLRQ
SOLFD
FD
FDW
DW
SSO DWLRLRQ
SS
RQ
Q
RQ
RQ
WLRQ
WLR
DW
DWL
WD
WD
QWD
QWD
QWD
HQW
HQ
HVH
VH
UHV
UH
3UH
6HUYLFHV
6HUYLFHV
0HVVDJH
0HVVDJH
TXHXH
TXHXH
0HVVDJH
0HVVDJH
TXHXH
TXHXH
T
,QWHJUDWLRQWHVWV
LQFOXGHH[WHUQDO
GHSHQGHQFLHVLQ
WKHLUVFRSH
/RFDWLRQ
6HUYLFH
Figure 10-4.  Scope of integration tests
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 413

404
to manage since we have to guarantee each dependency is in a valid condition for the 
service to respond. Guaranteeing all of these conditions is no small feat and raises 
several questions on how to release the inventory and the location service. Should we 
run these tests in every release of both services? We will further discuss these concerns 
in Section 10.3.
10.1.5  Half-Breed Integration Tests
There’s a distinction between the service’s mainstream dependencies, like databases 
or message brokers, and synchronous dependencies to other services, for example, the 
dependency between the inventory and location service. Mainstream dependencies are 
typically more stable and predictable. We aren’t continuously changing our databases or 
message broker’s version; it remains stable for a considerable amount of time, and when 
we change them, it often is a carefully scheduled operation.
However, other services on the architecture are being developed by fellow teams 
in the organization which might deploy their services frequently. Each has its own 
peculiarities in schema, data, configurations, and dependencies. Setting up a test 
to validate the interaction between two or several services can be exceptionally 
challenging due to the need to get everything right plus the need to maintain the quality 
environment synced with the newly released versions.
A variation of integration tests that ease that process is to delegate the responsibility 
to integrate other services in the ecosystem to the realm of end-to-end tests. Half-breed 
integration tests mock or stub external service dependencies but maintain mainstream 
dependencies like databases or message brokers. They can validate the service’s 
functionalities on a broader scope and be more reliable since these dependencies are 
often more predictable and easier to set up with containers. Figure 10-5 illustrates this 
scenario.
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 414

405
These tests still need to maintain valid external components and guarantee the 
coherency of the data and message queues. However, it’s only in the service’s direct 
ownership, which greatly simplifies the test’s development for the team governing the 
service. They don’t need to worry about other services outside their ownership.
The tests still validate the interaction with the location service, but by mocking 
the request. In this case, using mocks is a good approach to simplify the overall setup 
while guaranteeing the correctness of some interactions between the two services. We 
no longer need to worry about deploying and maintaining a correct configuration and 
relevant data on the location service; we simply mock the calls we need to validate the 
flow of the inventory service. However, mocks suffer heavily from confirmation bias.  
'DWD
,QYHQWRU\6HUYLFH
'%
'RPDLQ
$SSOLFDWLRQ
*DWHZD\V
3UHVHQWDWLRQ
6HUYLFHV
/RFDWLRQ
6HUYLFH
0HVVDJH
TXHXH
0HVVDJH
TXHXH
2UGHU6HUYLFH
3URGXFW
&DWDORJ
6HUYLFH
7HVWVVFRSH
6HUYLFHOD\HUV
6HUYLFHV6WXEV
,QY
PD
YHQ
LQ
QWRU\6H
'
UY
%
LFH
D
'R
,Q
PD
QYH
DLQ
HQW
Q
WRU\6H
'
6HUY
'%
'%
UYLF
%
FH

,
RP
D
WD
'R
'R
DWD
DWD
'
'DW
DW
'D
'D
'
OLF
Q
DWLR
$S
$SS
$SS
Q
SOLFD
FD
FDW
DW
$SSO DWLRLRQ
SS
RQ
$





*D
*D
*DW
*DW
DWH
DWH
DWH
DWH
DWHZ
DWHZ
WHZ
WHZ
HZD
HZ
HZD
HZD
ZD\
ZD\
D\V
D\V
D\V
D\V
D\V
D\V
\V
\V
3UHVHQWDWLRQ
UHVHQWDWLRQ
6HUYLFHV
6HUYLFHV
0HVVDJH
0HVVDJH
TXHXH
TXHXH
0HVVDJH
0HVVDJH
TXHXH
TXHXH
T
+DOIEUHHGLQWHJUDWLRQ
WHVWVOHDYHV\QFKURQRXV
GHSHQGHQFLHVRIRWKHU
VHUYLFHVZKLOHWHVWLQJWKH
RWKHUPDLQVWUHDP
GHSHQGHQFLHV
/RFDWLRQ
6HUYLFH
6WXE
2XWVLGHWKH
WHVW
VVFRSH
Figure 10-5.  Scope of half-breed integration tests
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 415

406
The teams will develop the mock’s expectations according to what they believe the 
service will return, which can be troublesome when those assumptions are, or become, 
wrong. Either way, it’s a great way to complement unit and component tests in a broader 
scope and guarantee the correctness of the overall flow of the service.
An interesting way I observed teams implementing them is having the tests bootstrap 
all the required preconditions for the tests and validating the end result. Figure 10-6 
illustrates this approach with the inventory service handling of order created events.
,QYHQWRU\6HUYLFH
'DWD
9DOLGDWHVWRFNVWDWH
'%
'RPDLQ
$SSOLFDWLRQ
*DWHZD\V
3UHVHQWDWLRQ
6HUYLFHV
/RFDWLRQ
6HUYLFH
0HVVDJH
TXHXH
0HVVDJH
TXHXH
2UGHU6HUYLFH
3URGXFW
&DWDORJ
6HUYLFH
/RFDWLRQ
6HUYLFH
0RFN
6HWXSWHVWVWRFNGDWD

6HWXSORFDWLRQVPRFNH[SHFWDWLRQV
3XEOLVKRUGHU
FUHDWHGHYHQW
+DQGOHVWRFN
FKDQJHGHYHQWV
7HVWV
7KHWHVWVVHWXSWKHLQLWLDOGDWD
WULJJHUWKHIORZRIWKHVHUYLFHDQG
YDOLGDWHWKHHQGUHVXOW
Figure 10-6.  Example of half-breed integration tests with the order created event 
flow in the inventory service
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 416

407
Before running the actual tests, we bootstrap the inventory database by setting up 
data. For example, if the test case is when a new order is created, we decrease the stock 
quantity by one; we might need to set up the existing stock quantity before actually 
running the test. We also set up the expectations in the location service mock.
To trigger the start of the test, we publish an order created event to the inventory 
message queue. The service will handle the event and produce a set of expected results. 
For example, the service might decrease the stock and publish a stock changed event. 
We can then wait for the stock changed event by consuming the inventory service event 
queue. Once we receive the event, which signals the processing finished, we can validate 
the event’s data and the state in the database. The main difficulty is to know when to 
stop waiting for the event; some test cases might not even publish anything, and we 
might want to validate that no event was published. For example, if the stock didn’t 
change, the service won’t send a stock changed event. Typically, we use a timeout but 
can increase the time the tests run significantly. An alternative can be sending a testing 
purpose event at the end of processing the order event. When the service finishes the 
processing, it publishes an event signaling the finish of the operation, whether it sent a 
stock changed event or not. Changing the code to be testable is a common practice in 
unit tests; however, in this case, it adds some complexity and adds code that is only used 
by the tests.
An interesting alternative is to monitor the order created event queue and wait for 
the inventory service consumer to acknowledge the successful processing of the event 
(e.g., in Kafka, wait for the consumer group to run out of lag). This way, we can be sure 
the service ended the processing without introducing additional developments in the 
service.
Guaranteeing the tests are autonomous has high synergy with applying a container 
approach to dependencies. We can run the database and message broker containers, 
set up the initial schema and data, run the tests, and in the end clean everything by 
disposing of the containers. This way, we guarantee no garbage data remains in a quality 
environment or data from older test runs don’t end up affecting the current tests.
Mocking or stubbing the synchronous requests, like the dependency to the location 
service, provides the decoupling of the service with the rest of the ecosystem and enables 
autonomous releases. We no longer need to worry about configuring services out of 
the scope of the service we are releasing, and overall the tests enjoy higher stability and 
consistency. However, mocks are heavily biased, especially when defined only by the 
consuming team, and releases are susceptible to defects in the interface interaction 
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 417

408
between both services. No guarantee is made if the location service makes a change in 
its contract or behavior. A new release of the location service can be deployed live with 
its tests passing and break every other consumer.
To overcome this limitation, we can complement these tests with contract tests, 
consumer-driven contracts, and production tests. We will further these subjects in 
the remainder of the chapter. Another alternative is to use end-to-end tests, but they 
suffer from even more constraining issues. Overall half-breed integration tests are a 
great complement to component and unit tests, especially when we can’t use extended 
component tests. They can provide broader scope validations of the behavior of the 
service along with the correct usage of its external dependencies.
10.1.6  End-to-End Tests
End-to-end tests validate the system as a whole, typically its correctness according 
to broad business rules. They often go well beyond the scope of a single service; they 
validate the business flow across multiple services and provide high-level, technology-­
agnostic, and business-facing validations. They are the type of tests that give the 
most confidence in the system since they cover a large ground. However, they have a 
mismatch with the distributed event-driven mindset, often have an overwhelming cost, 
and maintaining them is often extremely challenging.
Except for integration tests, all test categories we discussed until now are in the 
service’s scope; if we include any of those tests in the service release pipeline, the 
service would only depend on itself. On the other hand, end-to-end tests include the 
collaboration with several services; if we are to release any service, we need to run the 
end-to-end tests. Figure 10-7 illustrates the end-to-end tests scope in the example we 
discussed until now.
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 418

409
Not only the tests include the inventory service, its database, and message broker but 
also the location, order, and product catalog service. It would likely also include other 
upstream and downstream services, for example, the UI where the user submitted the 
order and the shipping and pricing services.
'DWD
,QYHQWRU\6HUYLFH
'%
'RPDLQ
$SSOLFDWLRQ
*DWHZD\V
3UHVHQWDWLRQ
6HUYLFHV
0HVVDJH
TXHXH
0HVVDJH
TXHXH
2UGHU6HUYLFH
3URGXFW
&DWDORJ
6HUYLFH
7HVWVVFRSH
6HUYLFHOD\HUV
6HUYLFHV6WXEV
/RFDWLRQ
6HUYLFH
(QGWRHQGWHVWVYDOLGDWH
WKHIXOOHQGWRHQGIORZ
DFURVVDOORUVHYHUDO
VHUYLFHV
Figure 10-7.  End-to-end tests scope
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 419

410
Releases
Since end-to-end tests target the entire microservice ecosystem, we must run the tests every 
time we release any service within the test’s scope. These kinds of tests are slow by nature; 
they typically involve several services with several dependencies, ranging from databases, 
message brokers, distributed caches, etc. When the tests run into an issue, for example, if we 
are doing a release of the location service and the tests are failing, every other release of the 
order, inventory, and product catalog service would have to wait for the fix.
Remember when we discussed in Chapters 3 and 4 how services must be 
independent and autonomous, how event-driven architectures potentiate this 
characteristic and facilitate a truly continuous delivery mindset? This can easily escalate 
to a step back in that mindset; a service is no longer autonomously released; it depends 
on the successful implementation of several other services. It also leads to complex 
lockstep releases and quickly escalates to releasing everything in a single moment, which 
is what we need to avoid by adopting an event-driven architecture.
Data and Environments
Another substantially cumbersome challenge of end-to-end tests is state management. 
Services without state are easier to handle in an end-to-end context since no data 
bootstrap is needed. However, many services have data and need to have data initialized 
in order to run test cases. This is a common challenge; we discussed it before when we 
discussed integration tests, but in that case, the service only had to manage its data. In 
end-to-end tests, each service has to have relevant data, and worse, all data need to be 
consistent with each other.
In an integration test, the tests may initialize test data and run the tests against that 
data set. With end-to-end tests, the services not only need to initialize their state but 
need to make sure it is coherent with every other service. For example, it’s not enough 
to set up test stock data in the inventory service, we also need to guarantee the external 
identifiers like the products we assign stock to must be the same as the ones in the order 
and product catalog service. The tests aren’t in charge of only one service but require an 
orchestration across all services in the test scope just to set up the conditions for the test to 
run. This necessity often requires intrinsic coupling between the overall flow and business 
logic and the tests. This makes the tests exceptionally brittle and susceptible to changing 
requirements. Often tests become more complex than the functionality under test.
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 420

411
The complexity of distributed architectures often makes teams build an integrated 
quality environment where the end-to-end tests run. Maintaining this environment is 
often complex and time-consuming. We need to guarantee the services are updated 
every time a release is deployed live. It can be done automatically, but often the 
intricacies of each service, their configurations, lack of discipline managing the data 
stores and message brokers end up breaking the quality environment frequently. 
It quickly leads to having individuals or full teams dedicated to maintaining the 
environment stable.
Another downside of the data bootstrap in quality environments is leftover data 
from previous test runs. Message brokers and data stores tend to be a dumping ground 
for test data that often is responsible for causing the tests to fail with false positives. It 
also further deviates the quality environment from production. A good approach to 
this challenge is to build a system on demand, deploying containerized versions of the 
services and dependencies to an environment, and clean everything up in the end. 
However, the tests may take longer to run.
Governance
Since end-to-end tests span several services, it makes sense to run the tests in the release 
of every service in the scope of the test. But that will likely mean several teams might 
be involved in the development and ownership of those tests. Deciding who has the 
direct ownership of the tests can be troublesome; we can assign it to a team that is highly 
involved in the overall flow; for example, assign the order fulfillment test to the team 
that owns the order service. However, it can get tricky to manage when those tests fail 
because the stock wasn’t reflected on the product catalog service. That team has limited 
context of that service; requesting assistance from the respective team might be the way 
to go but harder to effectively do if they don’t have skin in the game.
Another alternative people sometimes take is to have a dedicated team to develop 
those tests. This can be even more difficult to manage; that team has limited context 
about the effective implementation of the services and makes the teams that own 
the services even more detached from the whole process. This team often becomes a 
gatekeeper for releases making teams losing even more autonomy.
A better approach can be to have the tests with shared ownership; each team is 
responsible to contribute and develop the tests. If the tests fail, the team who is releasing 
the feature is the driver to find the issue; if it involves other services, the corresponding 
teams must help understand the issue; communication is key. A possible downside of 
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 421

412
this approach is the lack of drive to resolve flaky tests; people trying to make the tests 
pass for their release even if they have to retry the tests a few times (“a dog with two 
owners dies of hunger”). However, it is a preferable approach to deal with the test’s 
governance.
Approaches to Mitigate the End-to-End Tests Challenges
These are a few examples of the challenges of end-to-end tests. The context of end-­
to-­end tests often varies from company to company; however, here is some advice to 
address these concerns:
•	
Do you really need end-to-end tests? Distributed architectures 
require the correct approaches and techniques to quality assurance 
rather than trying to apply old ones to a new context. We will detail 
alternatives to them in this chapter and make an informed decision 
whether they are worth the cost. Of course each company has its own 
context and risk tradeoffs, so will yours, but ask yourself how many 
end-to-end tests you need and if (or how) you can replace them. 
Often it’s not about losing quality but making quality sustainable.
•	
Perhaps you don’t need to run end-to-end tests on every release 
but rather on the end of larger projects or technical revamps. An 
approach I saw used to some success in larger projects, is to have 
each service deliver its features live, but disabled. Before enabling 
the functionality, the teams ran an end-to-end test to guarantee there 
are no issues in the high-level flow; if any is found, the team would 
develop a component or unit test to guarantee it doesn’t happen 
again. Typically, large projects or major restructurings benefit from 
end-to-end tests; using them on an ad hoc basis and guaranteeing 
continuous quality through other means might be a useful approach.
•	
Perhaps you don’t need to validate the whole end-to-end flow. Often 
a segment of the whole flow is more critical than the remaining flow; 
validating that segment has more value than exercising the complete 
flow. Measure stability over test coverage and make informed 
decisions.
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 422

413
•	
Using a containerized environment that bootstraps, runs the test 
suite, and cleans everything up can be a good approach to difficult 
state management issues later on. It can also be a stepping stone 
for running the tests locally in the developers’ computers instead of 
using a shared quality environment. Running the tests locally can 
also be a good approach to avoid lockstep releases where an issue 
in one service blocks the releases of the other services. However, 
even when adopting infrastructure-as-code practices, this approach 
gets trickier with complex flows. Not only bootstrapping the whole 
constellation of services can be extremely confusing and time-­
consuming, but also maintaining it requires substantial effort. With 
high numbers of services, it might be hard to have a machine with 
resources capable of running every service and its dependencies. 
Focusing on a critical part of the end-to-end flow can be a reasonable 
option.
•	
Guarantee autonomous management of data and event schemas, 
event streams, and data stores. You must strive for guaranteeing the 
setup of the environment is automatic. Every change in the schema 
by the teams must have an associated script or process; the process 
to deal with event’s breaking changes must be accounted for in 
the quality environments in an automatic way, avoiding manual 
corrections in the quality environments.
•	
If you do need end-to-end tests, guarantee you only have a very 
limited amount. Most validations can be done by combining the 
other types of tests (unit, component, and integration) and highly 
contain the responsibility of end-to-end tests. Use them only for 
critical high-level flows and focus on clear business processes.
End-to-end tests can be applied successfully to small architectures with a very 
limited number of components which likely only one team manages. If this is your case, 
it might make sense to have them; however, they tend to get worse as we add more 
components and the architecture evolves. It gets even worse when we lose autonomy 
to release functionality, which typically is severely aggravated when multiple teams are 
involved in the same tests.
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 423

414
10.2  Applying Contract Tests and Consumer-Driven 
Contracts to Event-Driven
Contract tests are often associated with schema validations, like breaking, forward, or 
backward changes, as we discussed in Chapter 8. But they go further than that; they 
validate the correctness of a producing service against the expectation of a consumer. 
Automatic schema validation is pivotal in event-driven services and can be provided 
by schema registries (like Avro in Kafka8). Contract tests go beyond agnostic schema 
validation rules; they validate the inputs and outputs of producing services against the 
needs of consumers. This section will discuss their scope in event-driven architectures 
and how we can combine them with consumer-driven contracts.
Contract tests typically sit in the boundary of a service with an external interface. Their 
focus is the compliance of the producing service with what consumers expect. Figure 10-8 
illustrates the scope of contract tests in the same example we discussed until now.
8 More details in “Schema Validation on Confluent Server,” https://docs.confluent.io/
platform/current/schema-registry/schema-validation.html
'DWD
'%
'RPDLQ
$SSOLFDWLRQ
*DWHZD\V
3UHVHQWDWLRQ
6HUYLFHV
0HVVDJH
TXHXH
&RQWUDFWWHVWVYDOLGDWH
WKHFRPSOLDQFHRID
SURGXFLQJVHUYLFH
DJDLQVWWKH
H[SHFWDWLRQVRID
FRQVXPHU
3URGXFW&DWDORJ
6HUYLFH
,QYHQWRU\6HUYLFH
7HVWV
VFRSH
Figure 10-8.  Contract tests scope
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 424

415
In this case, the product catalog service consumes stock events produced by the 
inventory service. An interesting contract test we could add to the inventory service 
is guaranteeing every information needed by the product catalog service is being 
published. We can use mock or in-memory replacements of the message broker to 
achieve better performance and stability. However, many use cases benefit from having 
a dependency to a message broker due to serialization and compatibility concerns. The 
tests can guarantee the consumer is able to read the message by consuming the events in 
the same way, using the same schema, serialization protocol, headers, etc. For example, 
sometimes different consumers have different serialization protocols for different event 
streams, and it’s easy to mess up the configuration. This way, we can have a broader 
guarantee that the consumer will be able to read the message.
It can also guarantee some business logic the consumer is relying upon. Some events 
might have data in some fields in certain situations. For example, if we have multiple 
steps in the creation of a product, the first step might fill only the mandatory data, and 
the remainder of the information will be enriched later in the process; for example, we 
can create the product and add stock later. However, stock requires the size to exist in the 
product; for example, we add stock to an XS size. In this case, the product service might 
expect that all stock to be associated with a product size. A possible validation could be 
when the stock is greater than zero, the size is also published. These kinds of validations 
go further than direct schema validations; they guarantee an expected behavior in the 
producer, which if broken will cause issues in the downstream components.
Until now, we discussed how the team managing the inventory service could 
unilaterally add contract tests to the service. A valuable iteration of contract tests is 
to align them with consumers, typically referred to as consumer-driven contracts. In 
Chapter 8, we discussed the importance of consumer collaboration in the schema 
definition. This approach takes that collaboration one step further; the team managing 
the producing services has the mission to understand and guarantee the expectations 
of the consumer services in direct cooperation with the consumer teams. Consumers 
can even implement the tests in the producing service to guarantee their expectations. 
Figure 10-9 illustrates this scenario.
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 425

416
If we run the contract tests for each release of the inventory service, we have greater 
confidence that the functionality we are releasing won’t break existing consumers. They 
also encourage communication between both teams. Communication is pivotal in 
guaranteeing quality and understanding the needs of consumers; coding them down in 
the form of tests is a great way to guarantee their expectations are being met. Ownership 
of a correct message flow in every release is distributed to the different teams involved, 
which usually helps to guarantee everyone is on the same page.
Business processes are often choreographed with a series of events in event-­
driven architectures. Applying contract tests and consumer-driven contracts to every 
component in the flow can be a way to guarantee more scalable validations of the end-­
to-­end flow.
'DWD
'%
'RPDLQ
$SSOLFDWLRQ
*DWHZD\V
3UHVHQWDWLRQ
6HUYLFHV
0HVVDJH
TXHXH
3URGXFW&DWDORJ
6HUYLFH
,QYHQWRU\6HUYLFH
6KLSSLQJ6HUYLFH
3ULFLQJ6HUYLFH
&RQVXPHUGULYHQ
FRQWUDFWV
&RQVXPHUGULYHQ
FRQWUDFWVLPSOHPHQW
WHVWVLQFROODERUDWLRQ
ZLWKHDFKFRQVXPHU
Figure 10-9.  Inventory service consumer-driven contracts with multiple 
consumers
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 426

417
10.3  Test Categorization and Purpose
The types of tests we discussed until now have different purposes and scope. 
Categorizing the different kinds of tests can help make sense on how and when to 
apply them. Brian Marick defined four quadrants for test categorization9 that helped to 
clear a lot of misunderstandings when discussing the various categories. We can think 
of it by having tests focused on verifying what is expected against finding unforeseen 
corner cases or unexpected use cases. In the original Marick’s categorization, those 
test categories can also be more oriented to business or technology, as illustrated in 
Figure 10-10.
Using this categorization, we can find some examples for each quadrant:
•	
Q1: Fully automated tests oriented to verifying what we developed 
works as we expect it to work. Can be unit, component, or integration 
tests.
9 See article “Agile testing directions: tests and examples,” August 22, 2003, www.exampler.com/
old-blog/2003/08/22/#agile-testing-project-2
%XVLQHVVIRFXV
7HFKQRORJ\IRFXV
9DOLGDWHZKDWZH
NQRZ
)LQGXQDQWLFLSDWHG
LVVXHV
4
4
4
4
Figure 10-10.  Test categories divided by their focus and purpose
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 427

418
•	
Q2: Automated (or manual) tests to verify if we developed the correct 
functionality as defined by the business. Typically, functional and 
acceptance tests, including business validations of the application.
•	
Q3: Manual exploratory tests dedicated to finding issues with the 
application. These tests are creative in nature and are oriented to 
people interacting with the application in unexpected ways.
•	
Q4: Tests to verify the non-functional requirements and technical 
limits of the application. Can be performance and load tests, security 
validations, and other quality attributes like availability, correctness, 
or reliability. It usually relies on automation or specialized tools.
Although this categorization makes a lot of sense, some areas can be subjective. For 
example, if an acceptance test finds an issue with the application, we could, if possible 
and if small scoped enough, develop an automated unit test to guarantee the issue 
doesn’t happen again. Unit tests can be used to guarantee the soundness of business 
rules as long as they are small scoped enough (typically in the context of a specific part 
of the code like a function), although that unit test would now be technology-focused 
rather than business-focused.
Quality assurance practices have come a long way from the extensive manual testing 
plans. It’s actually pretty obvious the advantages of not having a single person or a 
team of individuals performing a repetitive set of actions every time there’s a release 
(there’s even the tale of a test engineer who automated his job for six years without the 
company noticing10). Test automation isn’t just smart, it becomes a necessary condition 
to successfully scale a distributed architecture. If you think about it, extensive manual 
regression tests might be an option in a single deployable component like a monolith, 
but when you have to operate dozens or even hundreds of autonomous components 
with several daily releases, it quickly becomes unviable to scale the number of manual 
testers to cope with the growing number of releases.
However, it doesn’t mean there’s no place for manual testing. Repetitive tasks should 
and need to be automated, but there’s a rightful place for curious and creative ways to 
break the application. Automating repetitive tasks frees quality engineers to do much 
more meaningful and creative work of interacting with the application in unforeseen 
and unexpected ways through, for example, exploratory tests. Manual testing can also be 
10 News in www.payscale.com/career-news/2016/05/programmer-fired-after-6-years- 
realizes-he-doesnt-know-how-to-code
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 428

419
relevant for use cases where we simply can’t automate due to the effort or cost involved; 
I mostly saw this happening with extensively large legacy applications. In event-­
driven architectures due to the component’s high decoupling and the large number of 
independent components, a strong test automation culture is advisable.
All the categories discussed in this and the previous sections are in the context of 
pre-production testing. As we will discuss at the end of the chapter, production testing 
approaches that we will discuss in this chapter can be categorized into the different 
quadrants of Figure 10-10. Production testing is an increasingly adopted practice that 
helps overcome the challenges of quality assurance in complex distributed systems and 
can be extremely valuable as a complement to traditional pre-production approaches.
10.4  End-to-End Quality Without End-to-End Tests
For years, end-to-end testing was the quintessential bastion of quality and a beacon of 
trust in the tempestuous releases of new functionality. In truth, they can be a valuable 
quality assurance strategy in monolithic applications. However, as we discussed in 
Section 10.1, they have serious downsides when applied to fully distributed microservice 
architecture. Event-driven architectures nurture several fully decoupled, independent, 
and scalable components, and as we will see in this section, end-to-end tests have strong 
dissonance with the event-driven approach. The approach to quality assurance requires 
different strategies and a shift in the traditional mindset.
Despite the adoption of microservice architectures, many companies continue to 
have an approach to quality the same way they always did, by deploying all functionality 
in an environment and running the test suite against the whole system. I always found 
it peculiar how we faced the limits of monolithic databases with ACID properties by 
moving to highly distributed architectures, featuring high numbers of components 
asynchronously communicating with each other, often with different database 
technologies with weaker consistency guarantees, and still managed to maintain the 
consistency needs for the business to run. But our approach to quality is still deploying 
and running tests against every single functionality in a single place. We were able 
to develop patterns to deal with something as complex as consistency and state 
management across distributed components, but why are we unable to have a similar 
approach to quality assurance? Why do we need to apply the old quality assurance 
approaches to a fundamentally new context?
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 429

420
In the same way, we don’t lock every single microservice database to achieve 
atomicity; we shouldn’t deploy every single component and block each service’s release 
to guarantee quality. The distributed nature of event-driven architectures requires 
an approach to quality and quality assurance strategies that preserve boundaries 
and independent releases. One of the most valuable characteristics of event-driven 
architectures is the decoupled nature of its components. This enables the architecture 
to be truly evolutionary; features can be implemented separately from each other; 
services are autonomous and independently released. It allows for teams to truly own 
their services and do their work without the shackles of dependencies, approvals, or 
gatekeeping processes. End-to-end testing is a deliberate and confident step in the 
opposite direction. We face all the challenges we discussed throughout this book 
to achieve this clear segregation, single responsibility focus, well-defined domains, 
autonomy, and decoupling and, many times, to throw it away in the quality assurance 
process.
Adopting a truly decoupled and distributed architecture requires the correct 
approaches to quality assurance, instead of forcing traditional techniques to a radically 
different environment. One way to do this is to combine some of the strategies we 
discussed in Section 10.1. We can approach end-to-end quality as the sum of the quality 
of each component, as illustrated in Figure 10-11.
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 430

421
Each component needs to guarantee its quality independently, through unit, 
component, and half-breed integration tests. Integration tests across several services 
were intentionally left out since they suffer from many of the same downsides as end-­
to-­end tests, but at a smaller scale. Each service must guarantee its correctness through 
its own tests, including its part in the end-to-end flow. It is pivotal that each team 
has a higher-level vision of the larger flow in order to understand and implement the 
validations of their components (this builds on the concepts we discussed in Chapter 4). 
The compatibility with other services is guaranteed through schema validations, 
contract tests, and consumer-driven contracts. Not only do they guarantee there are 
2UGHU6HUYLFH
,QYHQWRU\6HUYLFH
3ULFLQJ6HUYLFH
6KLSSLQJ6HUYLFH
0HVVDJH
TXHXH
0HVVDJH
TXHXH
0HVVDJH
TXHXH
8QLWWHVWV
&RPSRQHQWWHVWV
+DOIEUHHGLQWHJUDWLRQWHVWV
&RQWUDFWWHVWV
&RQVXPHUGULYHQFRQWUDFWV
6FKHPDYDOLGDWLRQV
&RPSRQHQWYDOLGDWLRQV
,QWHUIDFH
YDOLGDWLRQV
&RPSRQHQW
YDOLGDWLRQV
,QWHUIDFH
YDOLGDWLRQV
&RPSRQHQWYDOLGDWLRQV
,QWHUIDFH
YDOLGDWLRQV
&RPSRQHQWYDOLGDWLRQV
&RPSRQHQWYDOLGDWLRQV
,QWHUIDFHYDOLGDWLRQV
Figure 10-11.  End-to-end quality as the combination of quality assurance 
practices in each component
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 431

422
no unexpected changes in the event’s schema but also guarantee the expectations and 
behavior of downstream services are maintained. This is the situation where the sum of 
the parts is greater than the whole.
Typically, failures in the end-to-end flow map to one or a set of components, 
which can validate that condition in the scope of only the corresponding components. 
However, this approach requires close communication and alignment with each team, 
which consumer-driven contracts intend to tackle, at least partially.
I wouldn’t say this approach is failproof, it isn’t; however, neither are end-to-­
end tests. Maintaining a copy of the live environment is extremely expensive and 
time-consuming, and the result is a poor reproduction of the live environment at 
best. Production tends to be highly dynamic with differing usages, throughputs, 
and conditions that vary through time. An environment that only runs the tests 
doesn’t really stand near to the live conditions. These environments often use a small 
number of machines with resources far smaller than production (to contain costs) 
but fail considerably in replicating the performance and concurrent conditions of 
live environments. They also typically stand in the same network host or in network 
conditions that minimize or eliminate several network failures like network partitions. 
They often only have a subset of the production data (if any) which can’t really 
reproduce all the possibilities of data existing in production, for example, event streams 
covering every current or past use case. Configurations, network topologies, and 
connectivity conditions are often replicated but without any guarantee they remain the 
same as the live environment. After all, how many times did we run end-to-end tests 
only to find there were still issues after releasing the functionality?
End-to-end quality as the sum of its parts doesn’t guarantee there won’t be issues 
either. Would you be able to write a test for every single condition a service can fail? 
Probably not. Test suites excel in validating the known failures of the system. End-to-end 
tests are just one approach, perhaps valuable in monolithic applications, but extremely 
inadequate in distributed systems.
So, am I saying the only way is to live with the problem? Not at all. Pre-production 
quality assurance techniques can be complemented with testing in production 
approaches to mitigate many of these issues, which we will discuss in the next section.
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 432

423
10.5  Testing in Production
I know what you’re thinking, “I don’t always test my code, but when I do, I do it in 
production.” Well, I’m pretty sure you probably have your own tales of testing in 
production the same way as I have, but that’s not quite it. Testing in production has 
become increasingly relevant in the context of microservice distributed architectures as 
a way to complement pre-production tests or even as the only feasible way to provide 
comprehensive end-to-end quality assurance guarantees. This section will discuss those 
approaches and how we can use them in event-driven architectures.
As we discussed in the previous section, pre-production tests can have limited 
coverage of the possible failure modes of a complex distributed system. It can become 
even more challenging when usage patterns change over time. Trying to cover every 
possible failure mode often requires such a complex testing logic and infrastructure 
that can even match the system under test. Besides being limited, leaving the burden of 
end-to-end quality assurance to exclusively pre-production strategies will invariably and 
substantially delay the release and feedback cycles. With the right tools and practices, 
we can use the production environment to increase our confidence in our quality and 
release process in a sustainable and comprehensive way, instead of trying to use a poor 
imitation of the live environment.
The most challenging aspect of implementing this practice is often getting people on 
board with the approaches. People used to the traditional testing practices and oblivious 
to the challenges of distributed architectures often frown at the very suggestion of testing 
in production. Sometimes we put unmeasured faith in automated testing, perhaps the 
same way as we did in dedicated quality teams that did manual regression testing in an 
era before automated tests, without honestly facing the viability of alternatives. The live 
environment is often looked at as a pristine forbidden artifact that shouldn’t be touched 
(sometimes with good reason), but we should also consider that the correct approaches 
can greatly benefit quality assurance processes without endangering the live conditions 
(Cindy Sridharan has a great series of articles that further these topics that I recommend11). 
To be fair, health checks to services deployed in the live environment are a way to test in 
production. Often features are behind feature toggles, or we release functionality to only 
a segment of users; all of this can be seen as testing in production. Business validations 
occurring behind testing or sandbox users aren’t unheard of. Testing in production might 
11 Full articles by Cindy Sridharan, “Testing Microservices, the sane way,” December 31, 2017, 
https://copyconstruct.medium.com/testing-microservices-the-sane-way-9bb31d158c16
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 433

424
seem radical, but often they already are part of our processes, embracing them as what 
they really are; a powerful tool to fully achieve end-to-end quality can provide a more 
sustainable and transparent approach to quality assurance.
10.5.1  Shadowing
A common challenge of pre-production testing is the diversity, quantity, and accuracy 
of the data. Shadowing (also known as mirroring) is a strategy to expose new releases to 
production data without impacting the user. It can be extremely useful to guarantee new 
releases are able to interact successfully with real, real-time requests.
We often use mock data or generate data for our tests. There is a range of tools to 
generate random data based on given contracts (e.g., AutoFixture), which simplifies the 
data generation process. Despite its usefulness, generated data is random or manually set 
up, which always struggles to represent a comprehensive sample of the real production 
data. Random data can easily generate scenarios that don’t make sense and even cause 
instability in the test suite. For example, if we are generating a stock changed event, the tool 
can easily generate random values for product identifiers with unexpected size. Although 
it might be useful to test those scenarios, a test like that might fail in one run and pass 
in the next. It is better to test deliberate scenarios than generating brittle tests through 
random data generation, thus the need to carefully set up the random data. Random data 
also tends to deviate considerably from real production traffic, and even when they are 
accurate, they hardly mirror the variety of scenarios we find in production.
Mocked or stubbed data suffer from similar challenges. They are also particularly 
susceptible to bias; we often set up mocked data with what we are expecting to 
receive. What we receive and what actually exists in production can be very distinct. In 
production, there are also edge cases with data that we don’t expect, and thus we don’t 
create test cases for those use cases. This is often a source of issues with teams with a 
high test automation culture. Unfortunately, when this happens, we can only detect 
it in production, despite the high coverage we think our tests have. As an alternative 
approach, we can also copy data from production. But typically we copy only a sample of 
data, which differs greatly in quantity and might not have samples for every use case.
With shadowing, we can help prevent these issues by replaying current production 
traffic to new releases. Let’s work through a use case; imagine we are deploying a new 
version of the inventory service and its consuming order created events. Figure 10-12 
illustrates this scenario.
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 434

425
In this example, we have the inventory service with three instances in the live 
environment and a new version of the service we want to deploy. Before actually 
installing live and replacing the existing instances with the new version, the new release 
consumes concurrently the same events the live instances are consuming. For example, 
if we are using Kafka, we can simply have a separate configuration for the pre-production 
environment and use a different consumer group configuration for the new release. 
Since the new version will have a consumer group and the three instances will share 
a different one, the new version will consume the same events the three instances are 
consuming.
It is important to notice the new release is deployed in the live environment the same 
as a live instance and has access to all its resources, but with different configurations. 
The main goal is guaranteeing the service is able to correctly process live traffic with the 
3UHSURGXFWLRQ
/LYHHQYLURQPHQW
(YHQW
TXHXH
,QYHQWRU\6HUYLFH

'%
(YHQW
TXHXH
,QYHQWRU\6HUYLFH

,QYHQWRU\6HUYLFH

,QYHQWRU\6HUYLFH
QHZUHOHDVH
/LYHLQVWDQFHV
3UHSURGXFWLRQ
LQVWDQFH
$QHZYHUVLRQRIWKHLQYHQWRU\VHUYLFHFDQ
FRQVXPHIURPWKHOLYHHYHQWVWUHDPWRFKHFN
LWVEHKDYLRUDJDLQVWOLYHWUDIILF
7KHQHZUHOHDVHFRQVXPHVFRQFXUUHQWO\
ZLWKWKHOLYHLQVWDQFHV
Figure 10-12.  Shadowing in an event-driven service
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 435

426
new features. So the service will process the live event stream, and we can automatically 
detect changes in error rate and have automatic validations of the service behavior. 
We also need to guarantee the pre-production instance doesn’t effectively change 
the live state. The new instance will consume the messages, apply its business logic, 
but shouldn’t save state in the database or publish events to the event stream. We can 
implement that by having different configurations that inject fake message broker and 
database implementations.
An interesting metric to monitor could be the throughput of the service. But since we 
are using fake implementations of the external dependencies, it wouldn’t be accurate. 
We also wouldn’t be able to validate the implementation against a real database or 
message broker. We can further elaborate on this pattern by having a separate data 
structure or event queue with the pre-production data. Figure 10-13 illustrates this 
scenario.
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 436

427
In this example, the new release reads from the live event stream and the live 
database but writes to different structures than the live instances. For example, the new 
release can publish to a staging queue inside the same broker and write to a staging table 
inside the same database. This guarantees the new release is able to write successfully to 
the external dependencies. We can also monitor relevant deviations in the new release’s 
throughput since it should be roughly the same as the live instances (lag will be different 
and likely to increase in pre-production since only one instance is processing against 
three). We can also run automatic validations to compare both event streams and detect 
3UHSURGXFWLRQ
/LYHHQYLURQPHQW
(YHQW
TXHXH
,QYHQWRU\6HUYLFH

'%
(YHQW
TXHXH
,QYHQWRU\6HUYLFH

,QYHQWRU\6HUYLFH

,QYHQWRU\6HUYLFH
QHZUHOHDVH
/LYHLQVWDQFHV
3UHSURGXFWLRQ
LQVWDQFH
7KHQHZUHOHDVHLQWHUDFWVZLWKWKHOLYHGHSHQGHQFLHV
EXWZULWHVWRVWDJLQJVWUXFWXUHV:HFDQUXQ
DXWRPDWLFYDOLGDWLRQVWRGHWHFWGHYLDWLRQV
7KHQHZUHOHDVHFRQVXPHVFRQFXUUHQWO\
ZLWKWKHOLYHLQVWDQFHV
(YHQW
TXHXH
'%
Figure 10-13.  Shadowing in an event-driven service with live dependencies 
interaction
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 437

428
deviations. If we are generating unexpected events or events with incorrect data, when 
compared to the real live event stream, it would be an indication to invalidate the release 
and automatically fail the deploy. We can do the same with the database’s state.
Shadowing can also be applied to synchronous requests, albeit with the support 
of an external tool like a proxy. The proxy can duplicate requests to a pre-production 
instance similar to what we discussed with the inventory service. Figure 10-14 illustrates 
this scenario.
3UHSURGXFWLRQ
/LYHHQYLURQPHQW
,QYHQWRU\6HUYLFH

'%
(YHQW
TXHXH
,QYHQWRU\6HUYLFH

,QYHQWRU\6HUYLFH

,QYHQWRU\6HUYLFH
QHZUHOHDVH
/LYHLQVWDQFHV
3UHSURGXFWLRQ
LQVWDQFH
(YHQW
TXHXH
'%
6KDGRZUHTXHVW
3UR[\
7KHSUR[\GXSOLFDWHVDSHUFHQWDJHRI
WKHOLYHWUDIILFWRWKHSUHSURGXFWLRQ
LQVWDQFH
$3,
$3,
$3,
$3,
+773UHTXHVWWRWKH
LQYHQWRU\VHUYLFH
Figure 10-14.  Shadowing in with synchronous requests
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 438

429
In this example, the inventory service exposes an API to both writes and reads. With 
the help of the proxy, we can duplicate a segment of the live traffic to the pre-production 
instance. Some tools support this functionality out of the box; for example, HAProxy 
supports this kind of functionality seamlessly.12 Reads don’t have any impact; we can 
simply redirect a portion of the reads to the new version and validate its results against 
the live instances. If we want to validate writes, we can take an approach similar to what 
we discussed with purely event-driven services by writing to a staging structure and 
validating both.
Shadowing is exceptionally useful by allowing us to test new functionalities against 
real-time, live traffic without impacting the user. The downside is we have a new instance 
consuming from live resources; although they usually can (and should) handle the 
load of an additional instance, we need to guarantee the dependencies (like the broker 
and database) are prepared for it. Either way, it is an especially valuable and simple 
technique to guarantee new releases won’t run into issues when exposed to live traffic, 
without the limitations of sampling data from production to quality environments.
10.5.2  Canaries
A popular approach to production validation is canaries. Canary involves exposing only 
a segment of end users to new functionality, instead of making it available to everyone 
instantly. Unlike shadowing, this approach only minimizes risk; end users are still 
exposed to the new functionality, but on a smaller scale. This section will detail the 
several approaches we can take in implementing canaries.
One possible approach is to deploy one instance with the new version and add it 
to the pool of production instances. Since traffic is distributed across all instances, the 
new version will receive a part of the live traffic where the already existing instances will 
receive the remaining, as illustrated in Figure 10-15.
12 More details by Nick Ramirez, “HAProxy Traffic Mirroring for Real-world Testing,” July 23, 2019, 
www.haproxy.com/blog/haproxy-traffic-mirroring-for-real-world-testing/
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 439

430
Typically, traffic is approximately equal across all instances. In this example, since 
there were three instances in live and we added the new one to the instance pool, the 
new instance will receive only one fourth of the live traffic. In case there’s an issue, only 
one fourth of the traffic will be impacted and we can roll back the release.
Alternative approaches can forward only a selected segment of traffic to the new 
version. We can first direct only internal traffic to the new instance; for example, 
the internal teams can first interact with the new version before rolling it out for the 
entire public. This approach is easier with synchronous requests and a proxy that can 
selectively deliver requests to specific instances using a location or header. With ­event-­
driven services, it can be harder since services would have to selectively process or 
ignore events that weren’t directed to them or implement a custom routing algorithm. A 
further iteration of this approach is to divide traffic by relevant business information, like 
country or user segment. This approach is even more relevant with a lower number of 
instances (in this case, 25% of the traffic would be processed with an error).
/LYHHQYLURQPHQW
(YHQW
TXHXH
,QYHQWRU\6HUYLFH

'%
(YHQW
TXHXH
,QYHQWRU\6HUYLFH

,QYHQWRU\6HUYLFH

,QYHQWRU\6HUYLFH
QHZUHOHDVH
/LYHLQVWDQFHV
1HZYHUVLRQ
1HZYHUVLRQLVGHSOR\HG
DORQJVLGHH[LVWLQJLQVWDQFHV
Figure 10-15.  Canarying by sharing the live instances pool
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 440

431
The main issue with canaries is when there are issues, end users will be faced with 
an error. In event-driven services, it also means an invalid build was temporarily running 
against live data. Roll backing no longer completely solves the issue since downstream 
event streams or the database might be corrupted. An approach to mitigate this is what 
we discussed in Chapter 7 by rewinding the queue to the state before the deployment. 
A further challenge is to deal with database or event schema changes which require a 
more careful approach. A possible solution is to avoid breaking changes and do forward 
and backward schema changes instead of deploying the breaking change in a single 
deployment, as we discussed in Chapter 8. However, it adds complexity in favor of 
security and stability.
10.5.3  Feature Flagging
A common way to implement testing in production is through feature flagging, where 
new features are deployed but disabled by a feature flag. We can test the functionality’s 
correctness and compliance with non-business requirements like throughput and 
response time and activate it when we are confident the feature works as expected. 
Deactivating the feature is also straightforward since it only involves switching a 
configuration.
Feature flagging varies in scope; it can be all or nothing where we either activate or 
deactivate the functionality. Or it can be more intricate processes where we roll out new 
functionality to increasing amounts of end users for a given time period, similarly to 
canaries. There are also several types of toggles; they can range from toggling business 
functionality and non-functional requirements to security and experimentation features.
The concept is straightforward; we have a set of configurations that activate 
functionality depending on whether they are active or not. They can be more elaborate 
configurations when we only want to activate a segment of live traffic, for example, 
a configuration with all the countries we want to activate the feature to at that time. 
When processing an event, we decide which path to follow based on the event’s data or 
headers; if it is an event from a configured country, we activate the new features.
A common pitfall is the complexity some toggles have and how they sometimes 
become entwined with the core business logic. Following especially closely the single 
responsibility principles and dependency inversion can help decouple the toggle logic 
with the reminder service’s functionality. It is also important to have a strict rule to 
clean old flags when they are no longer needed. The build-up of several feature toggles 
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 441

432
through time can make the service needlessly complex. The added complexity will 
also reflect in the test suite since it should test both paths while the toggle exists. Thus, 
a strong discipline to refactor and clean old toggles is important. Although feature 
flagging is often a simple and straightforward strategy, some toggles extend through 
long periods of time, making extensive use of this approach more complex than it needs 
to be. However, with the right code refactoring concerns, it is a simple and incremental 
approach to expose functionality to live data.
10.5.4  Production Automated Testing
A further development of production testing practices is to run automated tests directly 
against production instances. This approach is arguably the most radical and requires 
strong alarmistic, monitoring, metrics gathering and control over the release process. 
With the right approach, combined with the traditional pre-production strategies, it can 
provide the most comprehensive coverage of the test cases that we can’t or are too costly 
to set up in pre-production environments.
To be fair, this approach is perhaps one of the most mature stages a company 
can implement. A common evolution path is typically to start with traditional end-­
to-­end testing and automated component tests and then implementing strong logs 
collection, metrics, and tracing. Then move to more straightforward approaches like 
feature flagging and canaries. Shadowing could arguably be the next logical step, while 
production automated testing is the very last.
The approach involves having a test suite that runs directly on new releases on 
production instances. This way, we can have test cases that test the full integration with 
the service dependencies. If the tests pass, we are sure there are no unforeseen cases 
that weren’t picked up in the pre-production tests. Let’s work through the use case of the 
inventory service we discussed until now. The service receives events, processes them, 
and publishes stock changed events to downstream services, in this case, the shipping 
service, as illustrated in Figure 10-16.
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 442

433
The new release is deployed alongside the remaining inventory service live 
instances. The test suite publishes events to the test event queue which are processed by 
the new version. If the service publishes events, it will publish to the real event stream 
and, in this case, should include a header indicating they are test events. The shipping 
service will use that header to ignore those events. The interaction with the database 
gets trickier, reads are fine, but when handling writes, there’s the concern of polluting 
the database with testing data. We can have a staging structure like we discussed in 
the shadowing strategy or ignore test data by signaling those records. An alternative 
could be having specific users or segments of data dedicated to testing, for example, 
sandbox clients that we know are only for testing. Many companies already do some 
kind of business validations directly in live recurring to these kinds of clients; running 
automated tests against them instead of manual validations might not sound so far-­
reaching.
/LYHHQYLURQPHQW
(YHQW
TXHXH
,QYHQWRU\6HUYLFH

(YHQW
TXHXH
,QYHQWRU\6HUYLFH

,QYHQWRU\6HUYLFH

,QYHQWRU\6HUYLFH
QHZUHOHDVH
/LYHLQVWDQFHV
3UHSURGXFWLRQ
LQVWDQFH
7HVWHYHQW
TXHXH
3ULFLQJ6HUYLFH
'%
:HUXQDXWRPDWHGWHVWVDJDLQVWD
OLYHLQVWDQFH7KHSXEOLVKHGHYHQWV
DUHLJQRUHGE\WKHGRZQVWUHDP
VHUYLFHV
Figure 10-16.  Production automated testing example
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 443

434
With this approach, we can validate that the interfaces with other services are 
working according to the expectations of the inventory service. All validations also occur 
in concurrency with the whole ecosystem instead of having only the tests running. 
We can also realistically validate non-functional requirements like response time or 
throughput. As we discussed, besides all the things that can go wrong with traditional 
quality assurance approaches, distributed systems have a myriad of failure modes that 
are infeasible to reproduce in quality environments. These types of approaches can be a 
valuable addition to assure new functionality works as expected.
10.6  Summary
•	
There are several quality assurance strategies we can implement 
in event-driven services. They can range in scope and quantity; 
combining them can be a valuable approach to guarantee 
comprehensive test coverage.
•	
Unit and component tests only depend on the service, are usually fast 
and stable, but have limited scope. Extended component tests can be 
a valuable way to validate the interaction with external dependencies 
but can be hard to find the right in-memory replacements.
•	
Half-breed integration tests can be a good compromise between 
including standard dependencies and other services. Standard 
dependencies like message brokers or databases are typically easier 
to set up and are more stable than other services in the architecture.
•	
Integration and end-to-end tests are extremely challenging to 
implement consistently. They also quickly restrict the release process 
and the team’s autonomy. There are approaches we can take to 
minimize these challenges, but they will always be costly to maintain. 
A more sustainable approach is to combine pre-production with 
testing in production approaches.
•	
Contract testing and consumer-driven contracts are a great way 
to validate the interfaces with other services and encourage 
collaboration and communication with both the producing and 
consumer teams.
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 444

435
•	
An alternative approach to full end-to-end tests in event-driven 
services is to combine pre-production approaches like unit, 
component, and half-breed integration tests with interface 
validations like schema validations, contract tests, and consumer-­
driven contracts.
•	
Shadowing can be an excellent approach to validate new 
functionality with live traffic without impacting the end user.
•	
Canaries and feature flagging can be valuable to gradually expose 
new functionality to increasing quantities of users. They can 
minimize the risk with new releases and limit the footprint of 
possible issues.
•	
One of the most mature approaches to quality assurance in event-­
driven architectures is automated testing in production. It can 
help in guaranteeing the coverage of failure modes pre-production 
approaches aren’t able or are too costly to detect.
Chapter 10  Overcoming the Challenges in Quality Assurance

---

## Page 445

437
© Hugo Filipe Oliveira Rocha 2022 
H. F. Oliveira Rocha, Practical Event-Driven Microservices Architecture,  
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-7468-2
Index
A
AddStock command, 37
Anemic domain model, 128
Anemic satellite services, 154
Apache NiFi, 59
API composition
aggregating data, 372
denormalized view, data, 375–377
ElasticSearch, 374
event-driven architectures, 375
filtering, 374
information, 374
limitations, 377
ownership, 377
pitfall, 377
pricing domain logic, 377
product listing page, 372, 373
requests, 374
user’s order details, 377
Asynchronism, 173
Atomicity, consistency, isolation, and 
durability (ACID), 187
Atomicity, consistency, isolation, and 
durability (ACID) 2.0
at-least-once semantics, 303
business process, 305
CALM, 303
consuming messages, 302
distributed systems, 304
duplicated events, 305
event handling, 305
event processing, 303, 304
event schema, 305
event versioning, 305
exactly-once semantics, 303
order, 305
product service, 302, 303, 305
properties, 304
retrying, 302
StockOut vs. StockChanged event,  
304, 305
Automated testing, 394
Availability, 196
Avoiding message leak
acknowledgement, 307
at-least-once/at-most-once  
semantics, 307
auto acknowledge interaction, 306
issues, 307
Kafka, 307
message broker, 306
poison events, 308
pricing service, 307
RabbitMQ, 307
B
Backends for frontends (BFFs)
benefits, 365
design, 365
functionalities, 362
limitations, 365

---

## Page 446

438
microservice, 363
mobile UI, 365
order management platform, 364
product information, 362
product listing, 363, 364
saving state, 365
UIs, 363, 364
use cases, 364
web UI, 365
Banqiao Dam, 276
Bee events pattern
anti-corruption layers, 340
data, 340
event-driven services, 338
event schema, 340
event’s state, 337
internal schema, 340
metadata, 340
OrderCreated event, 338
order information, 338, 339
order state, 340
OrderStreetNumberChanged  
event, 337
pollination, 337
synchronous request, 338
Bob Martin’s clean architecture, 89
Bulkhead pattern
bulkheads, 316
cost, 318
instances, 318
MongoDB, 316
pricing service, 316
priority queues, 318
ships, 316
synchronous requests, 318
taxes service, 317, 318
Business rules, 146, 148
C
Canaries, 429–431
CAP theorem
availability, 195, 197
consistency, 195, 198
distributed databases, 195
distributed systems, 197, 198
monolith applications, 198
network partitions, 198
nodes, 195
NoSQL databases, 196
properties, 196
Cassandra, 149
Change data capture  
(CDC), 41, 300
custom querying, 62
ETL, 62
event-driven approach, 58
functionality, 63
Kafka, 59, 60
monoliths module, 61, 68, 69
pattern, 59
SQL server, 64–67
Choreography, 150–152, 156
C# Linq, 33
Command query responsibility 
segregation (CQRS), 160, 161
flavors, 164–166
use, 163, 164
Command query separation  
(CQS), 160
Command sourcing, 172, 173
Common resilience patterns
circuit breaker
event-driven services, 311
fallback, 313
opened/closed circuits, 313
Backends for frontends (BFFs) (cont.)
INDEX

---

## Page 447

439
pricing service, 313
Redis, 311, 313
states, 311, 312
upstream services, 313
data, 309
event-driven services, 308
retries
cascading failures, 310
definition, 309
event-driven services, 309
exponential backoff, 310
external dependencies, 310
resource consumption, 310
scopes, 309
strategies, 310
timeouts, 310
scope, 309
Compacted topics, 178, 179
Completion phase, 141
Component tests, 397–399
Concurrency
bug, 228
event-driven services
inexperienced developer, 236
inventory service, 232–235
scale, 236
single-threaded services, 234
inventory service
instances, 234, 235
order created events, 233
issues, 228
monoliths
eCommerce platform, 229, 231
optimistic approach, 232
order fulfillment process, 230, 231
pessimistic approach, 232
requests, 232
warehouses, 230, 231
out-of-order events
clock synchronization, 252
denormalized read  
model, 252
instances, 253
inventory service, 252
operations, 254
ordering issues, 252
product service, 252
resilience strategies, 252
versioning, 254, 255
performance, 228
race conditions, 228
resources, 228
Concurrent changes, 142
Consistency, 196, 276
Consistency as logical monotonicity 
(CALM), 303
Consumer-driven contracts, 416
business processes, 416
inventory service, 415, 416
producing services, 415
Context maps, 182, 184
Contract tests
business logic, 415
business processes, 416
inventory service, 415, 416
messages, 415
mock/in-memory  
replacements, 415
producing service, 414
product catalog service, 415
product creation, 415
schema validations, 414
scope, 414
CreateOrderCommand, 99
Create, read, update, and  
delete (CRUD), 107
INDEX

---

## Page 448

440
D
Data modeling, 239
Data transfer objects (DTO), 162, 379
Decoupling, 148
Denormalized model, 174
Denormalized projection, 171
Designing events, 324
Distributed denial of service attack 
(DDoS), 286
Distributed systems, 302
Distributed tracing, 184
Domain-driven design (DDD), 48, 201
Domain events, 326
Domain experts, 326
Domain models, 118
Domain segregation, 182
Domain validations, 146
E
eCommerce platform, 42, 183, 199, 229, 
231, 238
eCommerce websites, 157
End-to-End message partitioning
concurrency/ordering
broker, 268
developments, 268
distributed synchronization, 266
flow of events, 266, 267
inventory service, 268
issues, 268
parallelism, 268
routing key, 268
traditional approaches, 266
inventory service, 257, 258
Kafka
anatomy/interactions, 258, 259
characteristics, 262
consumers, 260, 261
instances, 260
inventory service, 258, 260
offset detail, 260, 261
order service, 259
partitions, 262
product service, 260
topics, 260, 262
limitations
hotspotting, 269, 270
momentary hotspots, 270
synchronous APIs, 271, 272
message broker, 258
order service, 256–258
routing, 263–265
End-to-end quality
adopting, 420
atomicity, 420
compatibility, 421
consistency, 419
decoupled nature, 420
deliberate/confident step, 420
each component, 420, 421
end-to-end flow, 421, 422
environments, 422
event-driven approach, 419
event streams, 422
integration tests, 421
microservice architectures, 419
network partitions, 422
production, 422
test suites excel, 422
End-to-end tests, 11
business flow, 408
challenges, 412, 413
data/environments, 410, 411
distributed event-driven  
mindset, 408
INDEX

---

## Page 449

441
downsides, 419
releases, 410
scope, 408, 409
UI, 409
Event brokers, 324
Event-driven APIs
AsyncAPI, 385
asynchronous nature, 384
asynchronous operations, 384
HTTP, 385
message brokers, 385
OpenAPI, 385
order fulfillment process, 384
reactive UIs, 384
REST, 385
Server-Sent Events, 387–389
WebHooks, 385, 389, 390
WebSockets, 385–387
Event-driven architecture
asynchronous, 3
challenges, 36–38
choreography, 150–153
clear boundaries, 181
CQRS, 160–166
CQS, 160
data retrieval, 156–159
data streaming, 58
decoupled solution, 83
deployment process, 52
domain segregation, 181
DTO, 162
eCommerce  
platform, 46, 48, 50
event sourcing, 166–168
functionalities, 47
managing dependencies
legacy monolith, 70–75
module, 70
microservices, 1–3, 24–27, 76–78, 
154–156, 173, 174, 176, 180
data ownership, 22
decoupled/autonomously 
developed, 22
deployment, 21, 28, 29
evolving architecture, 28
example, 20, 21
flexible technology stack, 30
limits, 27
Ling, 33–35
resilience/availability, 30, 31
teams autonomy, 29
tunable scaling, 32
typical system, 32
monoliths, 2, 4, 52–54
orchestration, 146–149
order management module, 51
order management service, 56
reporting service, 55–57
SOA, 23, 24
transition phase, 16, 18, 19
two-way synchronization, 79, 80, 82
well-structured monolith, 49
Event-driven architectures, 153
Event-driven message types, 98–101
Event-driven microservices
aggregate size, 122, 123
boundaries
communication, 113
likelihood changes, 115
organizational composition, 114
type of data, 115, 116
cascading failures
connectivity issues, 282
database, 282
eCommerce workflow, 280
event queues, 283
INDEX

---

## Page 450

442
external provider, 281
geographical locations, 284
HTTP requests, 280
innocuous operation, 282
internal state, 284
load affecting services, 282
load peak, 282
location services, 281, 282
network, 280
order fulfillment flow, 281
order services, 282
pricing services, 281, 282
service unavailable/fail  
requests, 279
shipping service, 284
synchronous requests, 282, 283
clean architecture, 89–93
common failures
catastrophic failure, 278
common dependencies, 277, 278
communication, 278
direct dependencies, 279
hardware, 279
infrastructure components, 279
inventory service, 279
location service, 279
message broker, 278
network, 279
physical components, 279
typical topology, 277, 278
consistency, 276, 277
documents/events, 130
domain driven design/bounded 
contexts, 117, 119–121
durable vs. ephemeral message 
broker/GDPR, 94, 95
event queues, 276
external dependencies, 319
functionality, 127–129
layered architecture, 87
limitations/challenges, 276
load balancing
event broker, 286
inventory service, 285
load balancers, 284, 285
message broker, 285, 286
order service request, 284, 285
peaks/requests, 286
production, 284
synchronous requests, 287
models, 131
modules, 87
N-tier architecture, 88, 89
order’s address, 102, 103
rate limiters
asynchronous approach, 287
backpressure, 287
clients, 287
instances, 287
requests, 287
semi-synchronous approach, 287
strategies, 287
synchronous requests, 287
vs. request-driven services, 124–126
resilience, 277
security, 95–97
service dependencies, 319
service topologies, 107–110
solution’s design, 277
Event-Driven Pitfalls and Anti-patterns
command publishing, 112
faking synchronization response, 111
passive-aggressive events, 112
Event-driven services, 146, 228, 229
Events, 324
Event-driven microservices (cont.)
INDEX

---

## Page 451

443
Event schema
changes, 346
contextual information, 332, 333
denormalizing
aggregated view, 343, 345
boundaries, 345
caveat, 345
data, 343
process manager, 344, 345
shipping service, 344
design, 354, 355
event’s payload, 329, 330
evolution
backward compatibility, 346, 347
downscaler/upscaler, 352–354
enforcing compatibility, 346
event stream  
versioning, 351, 352
forward compatibility, 347
full compatibility, 347
managing changes, 348–350
no compatibility, 348
generic structure, 329
headers vs. envelopes, 330–332
message envelope, 330
metadata, 330
segregation, 329, 330
Event Schema Goldilocks Principle
caveat, 342
consumers’ needs/use cases, 341
domain meaning, 342
event schema size, 341
event’s information, 341, 342
inventory service, 342
large events, 342
OrderAddressChangedEvent, 341
order service, 341
small events, 341
town crier/bee events, 341, 343
use cases, 343
Event sourcing, 167, 169, 171
Event storming
active collaboration, 328
architectural decisions, 328
artifacts, 327
benefits, 328
business process, 325
definition, 324, 325
domain events, 326
domain experts, 326, 328
end-to-end process, 325
implementation, 324
limitations, 329
order fulfillment flow, 325, 326
session, 325
silos, 328
stickies, 325, 328
typical elements, 326
typical modeling approaches, 325
Event stream
event queue, 296
event sourcing, 298
Kafka, 298
message brokers, 298
order information, 296
order service, 297
saving state, 295, 296
segregation, 296, 297
stateless stream processor, 297
Eventual consistency
alternative to persisting
information, 215
strategies, 213
subscription service, 214
asynchronous communications,  
188, 189
INDEX

---

## Page 452

444
autoscaling
HPA, 221, 222
Kafka, 220–222
Kubernetes, 220–222
Prometheus, 220–222
subscription service lag, 222
CAP theorem (see CAP theorem)
decoupling components, 189
distributed systems, 187, 193
end-to-end argument
boundaries, 215, 217
eCommerce platform, 215, 216
file transfer, 216
guarantees, 216
order management  
system, 218
product’s stock, 217, 218
UI, 218
users, 216
end-to-end principle, 190
event-driven approach, 192
event-driven architectures, 188, 189
event schema
adapting, 199, 203
DDD approach, 201
developer, 202
eCommerce platform, 199
event-driven approach, 199, 200
fine-coursed events, 202
fine-grained events, 201
inventory service, 202, 203
NoSQL databases, 202
product sizes, 202
read and write model, 200
stock information, 203
StockPurchased event, 201–203
subscription service, 201
event versioning
backoff strategy, 210
caveats, 209
compensation alternatives, 210
distributed systems, 209
event-driven services, 210
inventory service, 210
manual operation, 210
ordering, 211
resilience, 210
retrying strategy, 209
subscription service, 210
tail-tolerant methods, 209
inventory service, 192
liveliness property, 193, 194
management, 224
monolithic application, 190, 191
order service, 192
product’s stock, 191
safety property, 193
service’s domain logic, 190
stock model, 192
storing state
inventory service, 211
microservices, 211
pitfall, 212
subscription service, 211, 212
synchronous request, 211, 212
strong consistency, 187
subscription service, 190
synchronous communications, 188, 189
tradeoffs, 222, 223
use cases
autoscale system, 220
databases, 219
daunting, 218
inconsistency windows, 219
microservices, 219
Eventual consistency (cont.)
INDEX

---

## Page 453

445
MongoDB, 219
NoSQL databases, 219
weak consistency, 187
Extended component tests
ElasticSearch, 401
external dependencies, 399, 400
H2 database engine, 401
in-memory dependencies, 399, 400
integration tests, 402
Java, 401
providers, 401
Testcontainers, 401
use cases, 402
Extract, transform, and load (ETL), 61
F
Failproof processes, 146
Full-stack teams, 366
G
Governance, 411
H
Half-breed integration tests
end-to-end tests, 408
guarantees, 407
inventory service, 406
limitation, 408
mainstream dependencies, 404
mocks, 405, 407
monitoring, 407
No guarantee, 408
order created events, 407
ownership, 405
scope, 404, 405
setting up, 404
stock changed event, 407
stock quantity, 407
synchronous requests, 407
Horizontal pod autoscaler (HPA), 221, 222
Hotspotting, 269, 270
I, J
Integration tests, 402, 403
K
Kafka, 103, 178, 221, 293, 300
Kafka Exporter, 222
Key management system, 98
Kubernetes, 221
L
Load balancers, 284, 285
Log sequence number (LSN), 66
M
Manual testing, 395
Message brokers, 172
Message delivery semantics
at-least-once delivery, 290–292
at-most-once delivery, 290–292
consistency issues, 289
distributed components, 291
exactly-once delivery, 290–293
inventory service, 289
message broker, 288, 289
message publication, 289
one-fits-all rule, 292
order service, 289
INDEX

---

## Page 454

446
Messages, 229
Microservice architecture
database, 45
definition, 43
domain, 46
Istio, 44
modular monolith, 45
Microservice domain boundaries
anti-corruption layers, 207, 208
bounded contexts, 204, 206
business process, 207, 209
complexity, 209
CQRS, 206
DDD, 206
decoupling, 207
inconsistency issues, 206
inventory domain, 207
pitfalls, 206
subscription domain, 207
subscription service, 204, 205
Modular monoliths, 7
Momentary hotspots, 270
Monolith
business flow is visible, 9
centralized data, 12
code reuse, 10
concurrency, 13
consistency, 12
coupling/lack of boundaries, 13
end-to-end testing, 11
limits, 4
local validation, 10
modular, 7, 8
monitoring/troubleshooting, 11
no network/limited external 
dependencies, 10
outdated technology stack, 15
patchwork, 5, 6
release cycle, 14
reliability, 16
scaling, 12, 14
simple deployment strategy, 12
teams autonomy, 14
typical, 4
Monolithic applications, 188, 198,  
228, 276
Monolithic database, 136
deconstructing, 138
Monoliths, 394
N
Network partitions, 195, 197
NoSQL databases, 189, 196, 219
Nuclear reactor, 357, 358
O
Object-oriented model (OO), 169
Object-relational mappers (ORM), 169
OpenTracing, 184
Optimistic concurrency
apologizing/asking permission, 236
architecture/implementation, 238–240
cost, 238
ElasticSearch, 244
EntityFramework, 244
inventory service, 240, 241
lack of locks, 237
LatestChangeTimestamp, 243
NEventStore, 244
retries, 237, 238
simplicity/flexibility, 243, 244
SQL Server, 242, 244
stock table/updates, 242
stock updates, 242
INDEX

---

## Page 455

447
Unix timestamp, 243
update operation, 243
Orchestration, 146, 147, 151, 156
Order fulfillment process, 150
Order service, 153
P
Participants, 139
Pessimistic concurrency
apologizing/asking permission, 236
architecture/implementation, 238–240
cost, 238
database transactions, 250, 251
distributed locks
acquiring/releasing, 247, 248
Consul., 248
inventory service, 245, 246
Jepsen tests, 249
limitations, 250
lock key, 248, 249
Redis, 249
uses, 249
ZooKeeper, 249
locking, 237
product’s stock quantity, 237
resource, 237
retries, 238
single-process application, 245
Postgres, 142
Pricing service, 149
Primary-secondary topologies, 149
Production automated testing, 432–434
Production testing
aspect, 423
automated testing, 423
business validations, 423
canaries, 429–431
feature flagging, 431
live environment, 423
pre-production tests, 423
shadowing (see Shadowing)
Prometheus, 221
Publishing events, 170
Q
Quality assurance, 393, 418
R
RabbitMQ, 95
Rate limiters, 284
Real estate selling platform, 238
Recovering data/repairing state
event-driven service, 315
invalid events, 315
invalid state, 314
monolithic application, 315
orders, 315
pricing service, 314, 315
publishing events, 315
strategies, 316
synchronous microservice 
architecture, 315
wrong events, 316
RemoveStock command, 37
Retrying techniques, 302
Rollback process, 145
S
Sagas, 134, 143, 144
Saving state/publishing event
choreographed steps, 295
event broker, 295
INDEX

---

## Page 456

448
event stream, 295
issues, 294
order fulfillment process, 294
order service, 294
outbox pattern
ACID properties, 300
asynchronous process, 299
atomic operation, 299
CDC, 300
crashing, 299
duplicate key error, 300
order service, 298
order tables, 298, 299
updates, 298
upsert, 300
service’s connectivity, 295
stateful services, 294
transactions/compensating  
action, 300, 301
Scaling, 178
Server-Sent Events, 387–389
Service-oriented architecture (SOA), 22
Shadowing
automatic validations, 427
definition, 424
edge cases, 424
event-driven services, 424, 425
generate data, 424
HAProxy, 429
implementation, 426
inventory service, 425
Kafka, 425
live dependencies interaction, 426, 427
live event stream, 426
mock data, 424
new release, 425, 427
random data, 424
relevant deviations, 427
stock changed event, 424
stubbed data, 424
synchronous requests, 428
uses, 429
Single monolithic eCommerce  
platform, 135
Software engineering, 187, 276, 395
SQL Server, 242, 244
Stock operations, 148
Synchronous process, 149
T
Test automation, 418
Test categorization
acceptance test, 418
exploratory testing, 418
focus/purpose, 417
manual testing, 418
Marick’s categorization, 417
production testing, 419
quadrant, 417, 418
quality assurance, 418
repetitive tasks, 418
test automation, 418
unit tests, 418
Town crier events pattern
CQRS pattern, 336
designing events, 335
eCommerce platform, 334
event stream, 335
inventory service, 335, 336
order service, 335, 336
OrderStreetNumberChanged event, 334
OrderUpdated vs. OrderStreet 
NumberChanged, 335, 337
partial events, 337
Saving state/publishing event (cont.)
INDEX

---

## Page 457

449
routing algorithm, 335
scaling, 336
small events, 334, 337
town crier events, 334
town criers, 334
Transactional and relational  
databases, 188
Transaction managers, 139, 140
Trivial business processes, 149
Two-phase commit protocol, 142
Typhoons, 276
Typical messaging patterns
publish/subscribe pattern, 105
request/response pattern, 106
send/receive pattern, 105
Typical resilience strategies, 302
U, V
Unit tests, 395, 396
User interface (UI)
aggregating layer
domains/services, 359, 360
eCommerce platform, 359
fetch/transform data, 361
filtering, 360
microservices, 361, 362
optimization, 362
patterns, 362
requests, 360, 362
CRUD-based
domains, 380, 381
DTO, 379
eCommerce platform, 378
inventory service, 381
product edition, 378, 379
product service, 381
user’s intent, 379
workflow, 380
decomposition patterns
application decomposition  
pattern, 366, 367
page decomposition pattern,  
368, 369
section decomposition  
pattern, 369–371
full-stack teams, 366
micro frontends, 366
microservices, 358
monoliths, 366
task-based
benefits, 384
domains, 384
mapping, 384
product creation, 382, 383
W, X, Y, Z
WebHooks, 385, 389, 390
WebSockets, 385–387
INDEX

---
